<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-06-21: Progress on Markab kernel'
link: 'https://samblenny.github.io/markab-dev-journal/2022-06-21.html'
published: '2022-06-21T00:00Z'
updated: '2022-06-21T00:00Z'
author: 'Sam Blenny'
copyright: 'Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny'
---

## Summary of recent work

Things I did since my last update:

- Hand-assemble a hello-world rom (it works)

- Revise Markab VM opcodes and the corresponding Markab core vocab words, to
  make string processing loops more convenient. This includes instructions for
  using registers `A` and `B` to work with auto-incrementing addresses,
  registers `X` and `Y` to work with temporary values, and some looping stuff.

- Revise my emacs and vim syntax highlighting plugins to keep pace with the
  opcode and core vocab changes.

- Write a bunch of Markab language code for the Markab kernel and compiler.
  This is part of bootstrapping the kernel, so I can't actually run or test any
  of this code yet.


## Markab kernel

For now, what I'm calling the kernel is perhaps a bit broader in scope than
what is typically included in a traditional Forth kernel. I may end up
refactoring some of this stuff out into libraries once I get it all up and
running.

What I have so far:

- Outer Interpreter words: `outer` `readline` `dowords` `word` `find` `number`

- Defining words: `var` `const` `opcode` `create` `:` `;` `here` `allot` `,`
  `h,` `w,`

- Branching words: `if{` `}if` `for{` `}for`

- String and IO words: `hex` `decimal` `space` `cr` `strcmp` `."` `.dp`

- Auto-generated words: constants for opcodes, constants for memory map areas,
  and opcode definitions for core words that map directly to a single VM opcode

The main thing I lack is an inner interpreter to run the opcodes and threaded
code from dictionary entries.


# Next steps

Once I finish implementing my first draft of the kernel, I need to compile it.
I want to make Markab self-hosting, meaning that a rom of the Markab kernel
should be able to load a compiler and re-compile itself from source code into a
new rom.

To start that chain of compilation, I need a bootstrap compiler. As far as I
can tell, the traditional methods to bootstrap a new Fourth(-like) system are:

1. "Meta-compile" a new kernel using an existing Forth system

2. Hand-assemble a new kernel from scratch (you become a human compiler)

Both of those methods suffer from the problem of inscrutability for people who
are not already Forth implementation experts. So far, the few references and
examples I've encountered about bootstrapping a Forth(-like) system fall
solidly into the category of "woah, this is super mysterious". I would like
Markab's bootstrapping process to be legible and well documented so that people
can understand it with a reasonable level of effort.

With that in mind, I'm tentatively planning to write a bootstrap compiler in
Python, then use the resulting rom to complete the self-hosting process by
recompiling itself.
