<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-07-02: Working towards self-hosting'
link: 'https://samblenny.github.io/markab-dev-journal/2022-07-02.html'
published: '2022-07-02T00:00:00Z'
updated: '2022-07-02T00:00:00Z'
author: 'Sam Blenny'
copyright: 'Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny'
---

## Recap

In my last update, I had the Markab VM working for a hello world rom, and I
was getting started with source code for the Markab kernel rom.


## Kernel and bootstrap compiler work

Since last time, I wrote a bootstrap compiler in Python to transform Markab
language source code for a kernel into a rom image that runs on the Markab VM.
I haven't quite figured out suitable terminology for talking about the kernel
and the closely related compiler which lives in the same source file. I feel
like I need to factor them apart, but I would first need to add support for
searching multiple vocabularies. So, for now, the kernel and compiler are
smushed together and I refer to them awkwardly.

The kernel/compiler includes:
- Outer interpreter to parse text input and look up words in dictionary
- Inner interpreter to run words as direct-threaded code
- `: ... ;` colon definitions to compile new words
- Tail call optimizer for saving code space and doing tail recursive loops
- Compiling conditional blocks with `if{ ... }if`
- Compiling counted loops with `for{ ... }for`
- Compiling of core words, constants, and variables

Along the way, I also built several debugging features:
- Symbol table generation by bootstrap compiler
- Instruction tracing in the VM using the symbol table
- Memory range dumping
- A new error code printing mechanism

Some other changes:
- Simpler memory map
- Several revisions to the VM instruction set to streamline common instruction
  sequences, such as for-loops
- New test fixture for compiling code in the VM (vs. with bootstrap compiler)


## Profiling and speed improvements

Once I got the kernel and compiler working well enough to write tests of code
compiled in the VM, I wasn't happy with the speed. The bootstrap compiler is
very fast, but compiling just three test words in the VM initially took almost
two seconds.

Using Python's `cProfile` profiler, I was able to eliminate or replace some
slow function calls in the VM. Much of the time seems to be spent on dictionary
lookups, so I tried to optimize hotspots in that code path. I got a big speed
boost from re-writing my Markab code for string matching. I got a smaller but
still noticeable boost from frequency-sorting the words in my core vocabulary.
The current kernel rom tests run in about 600ms, down from about 1900ms before
I started the optimizations.

I expect that I can get a substantial additional speed boost by changing the
dictionary data structure from a linked list to a hashmap. With that in mind, I
made a little Python script to evaluate some string hashing functions. My core
vocabulary currently has 163 entries. By my estimate, using a simple polynomial
hash with 128, 64, or 32 buckets would reduce the worst case dictionary search
list length for my current dictionary to 4, 7, or 12 items, respectively.

For now, I am going to leave the dictionary data structure alone and focus on
getting the kernel/compiler in good shape to do a self-hosted compile.


## Toward self-hosted compilation

To validate that my kernel and compiler are up to a useful level of
functionality, I plan to do a self-hosted compile of the kernel. I'm working
toward using the kernel compiler to compile another instance of itself from
source into a rom image file.

Some of the things I need to reach that goal include:

1. Convert the VM's branch and jump instructions to use relative addressing.
   This will let me compile object code for the new kernel into a different
   address range relative to where it will eventually be loaded from the rom
   file. I'm currently part way through this conversion.

2. Add some sort of file IO capability to the VM with suitable instruction
   opcodes and Markab core words to access it. I'm not sure yet how I want to
   do this. I definitely want some kind of sandboxing to prevent arbitrary
   filesystem access, but I'm not sure about the rest.

3. Extend the kernel's outer interpreter and compiling words to handle more
   than one active vocabulary. While compiling the new kernel vocabulary, I
   need to be able to use words from the current kernel's vocabulary. But, the
   new kernel's vocabulary cannot include any compiled dependencies on words
   from the current kernel's vocabulary. I'm not sure yet how I want to do
   this.

4. Add lots of tests


## Next steps

Once I get self-hosted compilation working and tested, I will probably convert
the dictionary from linked list to hashmap. If compilation speed is too slow
while I work toward self-hosting, I may do the hashmap thing sooner.

Once self-hosting and the hashmap dictionary are done, I will probably add core
words and VM opcodes for raster graphics and a pointing device. On the other
hand, if compilation is still annoyingly slow after re-working the dictionary,
I might instead start working on a faster VM in C or assembly.
