<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-06-12: Python VM is done-ish'
---

I've been more in building mode than writing mode for the past week. Or,
rather, the writing efforts have gone into code, README updates, and commit
message mini-essays.

Two main developments:

1. I've been building a virtual machine emulator in Python for a stack machine
   CPU with text console IO. The VM mostly works now with a fairly complete set
   of opcodes and moderately comprehensive tests. There are some things I
   intend to change and extend. But, for now, the VM is good enough to start
   working on a kernel and assembler. For the tests, I've been assembling by
   hand, including calculating addresses for jumps and branches.

2. I've been contemplating how to articulate what Markab is about as a project,
   and who it's intended for. Going forward, I plan to be more clear with
   communicating that Markab is an art project. I'm building a VM and a
   Forth-like language because I want those tools to help me make the work I
   want to make, as part of an art practice.

   Also, I've decided to abandon any pretense of attempting to follow
   traditional Forth naming conventions or standards. I will continue using
   system architecture design elements from the Forth tradition: data and
   return stacks, the dictionary, inner and outer interpreters, and so on. But,
   I will go my own way with naming of words. I plan to borrow math and logic
   operator naming from C. The rest is to be determined.
