<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

# 2022-03-13: Journal CSS, typing rulers, video modes

Had a bunch of fun yesterday with html and css of the index file for the dev
journal. So, decided to keep working on it today. Also did a bunch of reading
and thinking on old video modes and display hardware.

1. Moved the embedded style block out to a css file to prepare for maybe
   rendering these markdown journal entries as html. Also changed to a better
   method of vertical spacing between entries in the index.

2. Workflow for editing markdown: Made a template file that's easy to copy.
   Figured out some emacs tricks (mainly ruler-mode) to make it more convenient
   to edit with a 79 character fill-mode.

3. Side quest: Image search for "IBM Selectric" and "DOS word processor".
   Wanted to see their rulers. Results were awesome. 5 stars. Would recommend.

4. Side quest: Ebay search for "IBM selectric II font balls". Also good. This
   makes me curious about how many relatively high quality IBM bitmap typefaces
   may be floating around besides just Courier.

5. Side quest: Blake Patterson's Byte Cellar blog and vintage computing
   screenshot photo albums
   - https://bytecellar.com/,
   - https://bytecellar.com/2016/06/05/a-look-back-at-three-decades-of-word-processors/
   - https://www.flickr.com/photos/blakespot/albums

   This turned into a meditation on what is it that's so appealing about
   retro graphics, visually? (excluding nostalgia factor)


## Mediation on, what makes a video mode look good?

Reflecting on having spent a few hours sifting through all the stuff I've
linked to here, on the surface it looks random. But, I feel it's actually
mostly on task for the framebuffer, video mode, and color palette stuff I'm
currently thinking through for Markab.

I'm trying to work out to what extent I agree or disagree with uxn's approach
to using a limited color palette. I'm also considering the question of how
much configurability of video modes is helpful, and at what point it becomes
problematic by offering too many choices.

Having looked at many computers and printed material in person, and having
tonight just sifted through many of photos of different text and games graphics
on a variety of displays, I'm trying to articulate what looks good and why.

Thoughts and observations:

1. Text on low resolution monochrome character LCDs on portables like the TI
   CC-40, Epson PX-8, and modern cheap graphing calculators looks great.
   Clearly defined edges, good contrast (sorta... in the right light), and big
   enough to read at arm's length. I think this has to do with the fact that
   monochrome LCD pixels can be big while also having a solid shape with
   clearly defined edges. You can't do big pixels in the same way with a color
   LCD because each pixel has separate red, green, and blue sub-pixels.

2. Text and graphics on the old Macintosh 9" CRTs looks great in a way that
   clearly improves upon lower resolution screens like on the Apple II series.
   That might sound so self-evident as to not be worth writing down, but I'm
   trying to think through and articulate, specifically, what is it that makes
   that difference?

3. In particular, what's different about old low-res graphics rendered on a
   blurry color video CRT (Apple II, etc.), old hi-res graphics rendered on an
   old crisp monochrome CRT (Mac Plus), emulated retro graphics on modern LDCs,
   and modern pixel art rendered on modern LCDs?

4. I'm picturing all these considerations as points on a 3D graph with axes:
   - quality of color palette design
   - sharpness of pixels
   - size of pixels

   ```

           ↑                                    • IIgs + color composite (gross)
    bad    |                                      - blurry
    palette|                                      - lowRes
           |                                      - bad palette
           |
           |
           |                  hiRes
           |                 ↗
           |               ⁄   • Mac Plus (great)
           |             ⁄      - sharp
           |           ⁄      - hiRes
           |         ⁄      - good palette
           |       ⁄                            • IIc + green mono (decent)
           |     ⁄                                - blurry
    good   |  lowRes   • Epson PX-8               - lowRes
    palette| ⁄        - sharp,lowRes,good         - good palette
           +--------------------------------------->
           sharp                              blurry
   ```

   For color palette quality, to my eye, monochrome automatically ranks as very
   good, particularly for green or white phosphor. The contrast between black
   and green or black and white is very good. For monochrome LCD, the contrast
   can be similarly good, allowing for favorable conditions of ambient light,
   viewing angle, temperature, and contrast adjustment.

   For color CRTs on retro hardware, some of the color palettes look okay, but
   many look pretty bad. For sharp lines like text and rectangular window
   borders, the effect is even worse on blurry low res color composite CRT. For
   example, Apple's GS/OS on the IIgs with the Apple Color Composite monitor
   looked gross. But, conversely, for some low resolution pixel art, blurry
   pixels can actually make it look better on an old junky CRT.

   Screenshots of game art on the Mac Plus CRT have a really different quality
   to them which, I think, comes from the combination of crisp contrast and
   dithered shading. Apple's early Macintosh productivity apps, used black text
   on a white background which looks like a credible imitation of paper.

   Mac Plus game graphics seemed to use a black background, white foreground,
   and dithered shading (not always). This looks not at all like paper. Vibes
   were more of caves, haunted mansions, dungeons, outer space, and perhaps a
   bit Tron-ish. The dithered shading thing works because the resolution is
   pretty high.

   Conclusions...

   1. Sharpness and contrast are very important for text and line art

   2. Perceived quality of low resolution color seems to depend heavily on
      color palette. With good color selections, blurry graphics can look
      pretty good even on a garbage display. This is much less true for text
      though, unless the type size is quite large.

   3. Monochrome on a display with sharp pixels generally looks awesome. It
      works with big chunky pixels. It works with little pixels. Blurry pixels
      are less good, but that issue has gone away with the monochrome CRTs.

   4. Dithered shading on a monochrome display mostly works once the resolution
      gets higher. On 320x200 composite video resolution, dithering seems maybe
      less appropriate than a high contrast monochrome pixel art rendering
      style. At higher resolution, like 512x342 for Mac Plus, dithering is
      great.

   5. Going further forward in time to screenshots for Amiga, SGI, Windows, and
      newer Macs, the screen sizes got larger and took on a distinctly more
      cluttered feel. It seems like maybe, once there are enough pixels on the
      screen to go beyond the bare minimum for rendering 80 columns of text,
      available space starts getting jammed full of toolbars, scrollbars,
      buttons, boxes, borders, icons, and other assorted clutter.

      At some point in screen resolution growth, it looks like screen space
      started getting rapidly colonized by "design" and brand logos. Not as bad
      as magazine ads, but seemingly inspired by a similar type of thinking.

      I wonder if maybe a big part of the retro computing and pixel art appeal
      is that it reaches back to a format where there is less room for things
      which are non-essential. When available pixels are precious, they get
      allocated with greater care, and the resulting experience is better.

   6. Enthusiasm for "low-distraction" writing setups seems maybe motivated by
      this same problem where modern operating systems have evolved to a form
      that happily obliges the corporate desire to jam branding into eyeballs.

   7. Choosing to work with low screen resolutions could be viewed as an immune
      response against branding and ads. Perhaps enthusiasm for retro computing
      is not always as much about liking the old aesthetics as it is about the
      urge to flee from modern advertising?


## Emacs save-as for starting new file from template

1. Open template file
2. Use `C-x C-w`
3. Type new filename and RET at the prompt to save it with a new name


## Emacs ruler-mode

Turning on ruler-mode with `M-x ruler-mode RET` puts a ruler across the top of
the terminal window. Ruler bar Looks like this (fill-column set at 72):
```
0....!....1....!....2....!....3.#..!....4....!....5....!....6....!.¦..7.¶..!....
```
There'a a `¶` to mark fill-column, a `¦` to mark the cursor's current column.

Looks a lot like the ruler on an IBM Selectric typewriter. Vaguely like some of
the ruler features on DOS-era word processors. Similar to MS Word 1.0 and 5.5.
Not much like WordStar. DOS word processor rulers seemed to have a bit more
emphasis on indicating location and type of configurable tab stops.


## Emacs ASCII art tricks

Unicode names for arrows: https://unicode.org/charts/nameslist/n_2190.html

Unicode names for slashes: https://unicode-search.net/unicode-namesearch.pl?term=SLASH

Method to insert a Unicode character by name in emacs:
1. Use `C-x 8 RET` to run the insert-char interactive command
2. Type the Unicode name of the character (tab completion helps)
3. `RET` to insert

Method to draw ASCII art in emacs without typing tons of spaces:
1. Use `M-x picture-mode RET` to start picture-mode
2. Type stuff
3. Exit picture mode with `C-c C-c`

Method to do rectangular cut and paste in picture-mode:
1. Toggle rectangle mark mode to on with `C-x SPC`
2. Start mark at top left of rect with `C-SPC`
3. Move point to bottom left of rect with cursor keys
4. Cut rect with `C-w` (or copy with `M-w`)
5. Move point to top left of desired paste location
6. Paste with `C-y`
7. Toggle rectangle mark mode to off with `C-x SPC`


## Friden Flexowriter!

This thing is wild: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friden_Flexowriter

It's an automatic typewriter. There are the usual typewriter-y bits, but there
was also a configuration with two paper tape readers that could be used for in
a mail merge feature for typing form letters! I had no idea such machines
existed. Wow.


## Blake Patterson's vintage computing screenshot albums

These are interesting for showing a variety of different types of BBS
interfaces and low-res color graphics in the form of photos of CRTs. Rather
different than emulator screenshots.

BBS login screens:
- https://www.flickr.com/photos/blakespot/albums/72157707233990765

RetroBattleStations entries:
- https://www.flickr.com/photos/blakespot/albums/72157675384122452

TI CC-40 (portable with wide aspect ratio LCD):
- Kinda like TRS-80 Model 100
- Has a really interesting removable memory cartridge
- https://www.flickr.com/photos/blakespot/albums/72157625387234589

Amiga 1000:
- https://www.flickr.com/photos/blakespot/albums/72157621596272210

Apple IIe:
- https://www.flickr.com/photos/blakespot/albums/72157609631794748

TRS-80 Model 4:
- Time Bandit screenshots (monochrome isometric) are kinda interesting
- Foreground/background contrast on a monochrome CRT with border area and bezel
  gives a really different impression compared to sharp rectangular emulator
  screenshots. Black background is just the same color as the border area of
  the CRT. I'm not explaining it well.
- https://www.flickr.com/photos/blakespot/albums/72157604743399188

Mac Plus:
- Monochrome CRT game screens in a dark room. Similar vibes as with Model 4,
  but Mac resolution is higher and there's a lot more dithered shading.
- https://www.flickr.com/photos/blakespot/albums/72157604396195465

Epson PX-8 (portable with wide aspect ratio LCD):
- Really nice LCD with 8 lines of chunky text
- Built in micro-cassette drive
- https://www.flickr.com/photos/blakespot/albums/72157604338172447

Atari 520ST
- Some of the screenshots have color backgrounds that fill the entire CRT
  visible area, with overscan going under the bezel, are interesting.
- https://www.flickr.com/photos/blakespot/albums/72157604329654261

Apple IIc
- CRT is good example of classic low-res green screen text mode
- https://www.flickr.com/photos/blakespot/albums/72157604316614196
