<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-07-10: Starting an Atom feed'
link: 'https://samblenny.github.io/markab-dev-journal/2022-07-10.html'
published: '2022-07-10T04:18:00Z'
updated: '2022-07-10T04:18:00Z'
author: 'Sam Blenny'
copyright: 'Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny'
---

## Old site generator workflow

My existing markdown to html workflow went like this:

1. Start a new journal entry by using the `day/new-entry.sh` shell script to
   automatically name a Markdown file with the current date and fill in some
   metadata and template stuff. The script also updates my main index file.

2. Write my entry in Markdown.

3. Run `make` to have Pandoc generate html using the `pandoc_template.html`
   template.

4. Preview using the local web server ruby script, `/webserver.rb`.

5. Commit and push to GitHub, which causes the static html to be published on
   GitHub Pages.


## New workflow with Atom feed

To publish an Atom feed, I've added a Python script, `day/feed.py`, that gets
invoked by `make` to construct the Atom feed with the help of Pandoc. The feed
script works like this:

1. Look in the current working directory for files with names ending in `.md`.
   In those files, look for a YAML metadata section that contains the date,
   copyright and link fields needed for the `day/atom_template.html` pandoc
   template. (my older journal entries only have a "title" metadata field)

2. Filter the Markdown files with the full set of metadata fields to select the
   10 most recent journal entries.

3. For each of the 10 most recent entries, invoke Pandoc to convert the Markdown
   file into an xhtml serialized HTML5 fragment, enclosed in some additional
   xml to form an xml fragment for a full Atom entry. This uses the template
   at `day/atom_template.html`, and the html extension is important for telling
   Pandoc which rendering option to use (HTML5).

4. Insert the Atom entry xml fragments into another template to form the full
   Atom feed (this template is a string in `day/feed.py`.

5. Save the Atom feed xml to `/feed.atom`. The `.atom` file extension is
   important to make GitHub pages serve the file with the right content-type
   header.
