<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-04-17: Progress toward outer interpreter'
---

## Status

For the past week, I've been working on building blocks that I will need to
build a Forth outer interpreter for Markab. What I want to end up with is an
interpreter shell -- like bash, python3, or irb -- where I can interactively
input and evaluate source code. That means I need four main capabilities:

1. Raw keyboard input: I need to be able to read individual keystrokes from the
   input stream to build line and screen editing features. For example, I want
   to be able to use the arrow keys to move the cursor around.

2. Data structures and algorithms for buffer of UTF-8 encoded Unicode text: For
   old-school ASCII encoded American English text, things are simple because
   it's safe to assume that one byte corresponds to one printable character,
   and the character glyphs are all the same width. With non-English Unicode
   text, none of those assumptions hold. When working with a buffer of UTF-8
   bytes, if you want to delete or insert a character, or just move your cursor
   around, there's much more complexity to consider.

3. ANSI escape sequence parsing for keyboard input: The Linux virtual terminal
   driver provides keystrokes for arrow keys, F-keys, and other keys in the
   form of escape sequences, such as the three byte sequence `Esc [ D` for
   pressing the left arrow key. I will need a state machine to identify escape
   sequences and translate them into events such as "pressed left-arrow", or
   "pressed control-left-arrow".

4. ANSI escape sequence generation for text editing user interface: To make a
   terminal emulator do fancy stuff, such as changing the style or color of
   text, or moving the cursor around, you send it special escape sequence
   commands. For example, to print "hello" in bright red underlined text, you
   could send the 8-byte escape sequence `Esc [ 31 m Esc [ 4 m`, then "hello",
   then the 3-byte escape sequence `Esc [ m`. In python, that could be done as,
   `print("\x1b[91m\x1b[4mhello\x1b[m")`.


## POSIX termios functions

In Linux, to configure how the terminal provides keyboard input, the best
method seems to be using the `tcgetattr()` standard library function, which is
part of the POSIX termios API. For relevant documentation on Linux or macOS, try
`man termios` or `man tcgetattr`.


## ANSI escape sequences

The official standards for ANSI escape sequences are [ECMA-48] and [ECMA-35],
but those are fairly painful to decipher. The [ANSI Escape Code] page on
Wikipedia has a much friendlier summary.

[ECMA-48]: https://www.ecma-international.org/wp-content/uploads/ECMA-48_5th_edition_june_1991.pdf
[ECMA-35]: https://www.ecma-international.org/wp-content/uploads/ECMA-35_6th_edition_december_1994.pdf
[ANSI Escape Code]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ANSI_escape_code

Important escape sequences:

```
Default value of $n and $m is 1

Esc [ A -- cursor up 1 line
Esc [ B -- cursor down 1 line
Esc [ C -- cursor right 1 column
Esc [ D -- cursor left 1 column
Esc [ $n G -- move cursor to column $n
Esc [ $n ; $m H -- move cursor to column $n, row $m
Esc [ J -- clear from cursor to end of screen
Esc [ 2 J -- clear entire screen
Esc [ K -- clear from cursor to end of line
Esc [ 2 K -- clear entire line
Esc [ 6 n -- get cursor as `Esc [ $n ; $m R` ($n is row, $m is col)


SGR (Select Graphic Rendition)

Esc [ m -- reset attributes to normal
Esc [ 1 m -- bold
Esc [ 4 m -- underline
Esc [ 7 m -- inverse video
Esc [ {30..37,90..97} m -- set foreground color
Esc [ {40..47,100..107} m -- set background color

Example to set red foreground color: `Esc [ 31 m`

Color values for use with: `Exc [ $n m`, where $n is an FG or BG value:

FG   BG  Name
--   --  ---------------------
30   40  Black
31   41  Red
32   42  Green
33   43  Yellow
34   44  Blue
35   45  Magenta
36   46  Cyan
37   47  White
90  100  Gray ("bright black")
91  101  Bright red
92  102  Bright green
93  103  Bright Yellow
94  104  Bright blue
95  105  Bright Magenta
96  106  Bright Cyan
97  107  Bright White
```


### Method to detect terminal dimensions

When looking for a method to detect the current row and column dimensions of
a terminal, I found a couple mentions of the following method:

1. Move cursor to very large row and column value such as (999, 999) with the
   expectation that the terminal emulator will clip your requested values to
   it's maximum row and column.

2. Get the cursor position. The result should be at the maximum available row
   and column, which is equivalent to the terminal's row and column dimensions.
