<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-04-01: Threaded code + NASM assembly'
---

## No pranks here

In the US, it's traditional to make mischief on this day of this month. But, as
with other unfortunate traditions, I prefer to steer clear. This is just a
normal post.


## Learning about threaded interpreter models

I've been trying to understand the different threaded interpreter models that
have been used to implement Forth systems. The clearest reference, by far, that
I've found on the subject is Brad Rodriguez's [Moving Forth] series.

[Moving Forth]: https://www.bradrodriguez.com/papers/moving1.htm

As I understand it, the type of threading you select determines which data
structures you need to use for your dictionary, the algorithm and resulting
efficiency of your inner interpreter, and the complexity of your compiler. It
seems there are typically significant tradeoffs in performance versus
complexity of implementation. That's important to understand when analyzing old
FIG-Forth implementations because they were designed for ease of portability as
a primary goal, at the expense of performance.

### Summary of Moving Forth: Threading models

- **Indirect Threaded Code** (ITC): Used in FIG-Forth and commonly described in
  books. Dictionary headers for compiled words contain two pointers, one for
  the machine code implementing the word's action (inner interpreter, literal
  loader, etc.), and a second for "parameters" to be used by the machine code
  (addresses of headers for words to be called, literal values, etc.). Words
  involved in the machine code implementations include `ENTER`, `NEXT`, and
  `EXIT`. The downside of ITC is that it requires two layers of pointer
  dereferencing to reach the machine code for a word's action.

- **Direct Threaded Code** (DTC): DTC puts the machine code for word's action
  in the dictionary header for that word. So, instead of a pointer to the code,
  header holds the actual code, or perhaps a jump instruction to a shared
  subroutine. This saves one pointer dereference. Brad Rodriguez prefers this
  type of implementation.

  There is an important size and speed tradeoff for the `NEXT` inner
  interpreter word at the end of each machine code block. Invoking `NEXT` with
  a `JMP` can save space, depending on the architecture, but inlining the
  machine code for `NEXT` is likely to be faster. Since `NEXT` runs frequently,
  it has big impact on overall system performance.

- **Subroutine Threaded Code** (STC): STC puts a sequence of subroutine calls
  in the dictionary header for each word. So, instead of a list of addresses
  that get processed by the inner interpreter, the header has machine code with
  `CALL` instructions. Depending on the architecture, STC may perform better
  than DTC, based on the number of available registers, speed of `PUSH` and
  `POP` to return stack, and other factors. Key difference is that STC uses
  `CALL` and `RET` instead of an the inner interpreter as used by ITC or DTC.
  It's also possible to inline machine code for short words instead of
  `CALL`ing them.

- **Token Threaded Code** (TTC): TTC uses lists of tokens, instead of lists of
  addresses, to represent the words comprising a definition in the dictionary.
  For a dictionary with less than 256 items, words can be represented by 1-byte
  tokens. Tokens are resolved to addresses with a lookup table. TTC is slow
  because of the extra table lookups, but it allows for very compact code.


### Threading model mentions by Jeff Fox

According to Jeff Fox's [Ultratechnology blog] (scroll down to "10/23/10
Silicon Valley Forth Interest Group Meeting" heading), subroutine threading
with inlined native code is a common implementation method for modern Forth
systems. Also, the [Ultratechnology forth0] page says that Chuck Moore's
MachineForth "uses subroutine threading for defined words".

[Ultratechnology blog]: http://www.ultratechnology.com/blog.htm
[Ultratechnology forth0]: http://www.ultratechnology.com/forth0.htm


### Summary of Moving Forth: Virtual registers

Traditionally, Forth implementations used five "virtual registers" in defining
the `NEXT`, `ENTER`, and `EXIT` inner interpreter words:

- **W** (Working Register): Used for arithmetic and fetch/store pointers.

- **IP** (Interpreter Pointer): Used by `NEXT`, `ENTER`, and `EXIT` to hold
  memory addresses. Needs to work with `INC`.

- **PSP** or **SP** (Parameter Stack Pointer): Data stack used by `CODE` words.
  Needs to support indexed addressing along with `INC` and `DEC`.

- **RSP** or **RP** (Return Stack Pointer): Return stack "used by colon
  definitions in ITC and DTC Forths, and by all words in STC Forths". Same
  requirements as for PSP.

- **X** (another working register): Used for jumps in ITC or as scratch
  register in `CODE` words.

- **UP** (User Pointer): Holds base address of user area in multi-tasking
  Forths. This is used for context switching, so not needed in single-tasking
  Forths.

- **TOS** (Top Of Stack): Keeping top item of stack in a register, rather than
  memory, speeds up words that don't need to push or pop data. Keeping the two
  top items of stack in registers adds a lot of complexity on general purpose
  CPUs that were not designed for Forth [*my question: perhaps worth it due to a
  single memory access on a normal CPU taking many clock cycles?*]


### Summary of Moving Forth: Core CODE words

[Part 2] of Moving Forth describes some of the author's benchmarking, but the
interesting part for me was how it identified a set of core `CODE` words used
for implementing the inner interpreter of a Forth system:

```
NEXT  (ends CODE definitions)
ENTER (also DOCOL or DOCOLON, omit for STC)
EXIT  (also ;S for fig, or RET instruction for STC)
DOVAR (code for VARIABLE)
DOCON (code for constant)
LIT   (code for literals)
@
!
+
DODOES (code for DOES>)
SWAP
OVER
ROT
0=
+!    (uses TOS)
```

[Part 2]: https://www.bradrodriguez.com/papers/moving2.htm


## Assembly with NASM

I've started experimenting with amd64 (ia64) assembly to try out some of the
ideas I'm reading about with the different threading models.

Initial experiments are at:
- https://github.com/samblenny/markab-lab/tree/main/asm/amd64

Some useful references:

- https://cs.lmu.edu/~ray/notes/nasmtutorial/

- https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/intel-sdm.html
  (programmer reference manuals describing registers, opcodes, etc.)

- https://blog.rchapman.org/posts/Linux_System_Call_Table_for_x86_64/
  (good blog post on invoking syscalls on ia64)

- https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/v5.10/arch/x86/entry/syscalls/syscall_64.tbl
  ("64-bit system call numbers and entry vectors")

- https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/v5.10/arch/x86/include/asm/syscall_wrapper.h
  (explains x64 argument to register mapping for syscalls)

- https://refspecs.linuxbase.org/ (ELF and ABI specs)

- https://stackoverflow.com/tags/x86/info (lots of x86/ia64 assembly links)
