<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-05-15: Compiler progress'
---

## General project status

I've slowed down my pace of development on Markab. I was pushing it kinda hard,
to the exclusion of other things that could use my attention.

The stuff below describes the current state of compiling in markab-lab/repl.


## Data structures

I split the dictionary linked list into two parts. Dictionary 0 is created at
compile time and contains words for the subset of tokens which are available to
invoke directly from the outer interpreter's command line. Dictionary 2 is for
user-defined words created at runtime through colon-definitions. There is no
Dictionary 1 yet, but I might use that for compiler words -- not sure.

I'm using a field in the dictionary list item records to indicate whether that
word's parameter contains a VM instruction token, a pointer to variable memory,
or a pointer to code memory. The token and code memory pointer mechanisms work,
but the variable memory pointer mechanism is incomplete.

Variable memory is accessible by numeric address with the fetch and store words
(`@` and `!`). Currently variable memory is not executable, but I might decide
to change that.

Code memory is executable by the token interpreter, but it is not currently
accessible with fetch and store. Again, I might decide to change that. Writes
to to code memory only happen by way of compiler words, which are implemented
in assembly language (not token code as is the case for user-defined words).

Goals of splitting things up in this way, rather than mushing everything all
together in one dictionary in the traditional figForth style, include:

1. By storing compiled token code contiguously in its own memory area, rather
   than chopped up in chunks within a linked list, it becomes possible to do
   tricks with continuations (implicit tail calls), like this:

   ```
   : intro_word do some stuff       ( <-- no semicolon!)
   : continuation do more stuff ;
   ```

2. Limiting the memory areas which can be modified with fetch and store should
   make it easier to detect, and recover from, logic errors. This should also
   protect against stack-smashing.

3. Preventing arbitrary modifications to code memory (only compiler words can
   make changes) should make it easier to write reliable code. This comes at
   the expense of some of the traditional extensibility that Forth is known
   for. Maybe that stuff is too powerful? Maybe I'm being overly cautious? I'm
   not sure. I want to try this way and see how it works out. My sense is that
   a system with unbounded possibilities for runtime modification of code would
   be a bad idea, because it would make debugging difficult when things go
   wrong.


## What works and what is incomplete

Things that work:

- `: ... ;` -- colon definitions for adding words to the dictionary

- `: ... 1 2 + . ;` -- compiled number literals and stack operations

- `: ... ( comment) ;` -- compiled comments (they just get ignored)

- `: ... ." string" ;` -- compiled printing of strings

- `32 0 !` -- storing dword by numeric address (this stores 32 at address 0)

- `8 4 b!` -- store byte by numeric address (this stores byte=8 at address 4)

- `0 @` -- fetch dword

- `4 b@` -- fetch byte


Things that do not work yet:

- `: a ... ;  : b a ;` -- compiled nested calls

- `variable foo  1 foo !` -- compiling of named variables

- `1 constant bar` -- compiling of constants

- `variable arr 5 allot` -- compiling of named arrays

- compiled loops and branching (do-loop, if-then-else, ...)
