<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-05-21: Compiler + planning a refactor'
---

## More compiler progress

Since my last update, I've gotten several new compiler features working, with
some related improvements to the token-threaded inner interpreter (aka VM):

- `Jump` and `Call` virtual machine instructions (tokens)

- Nested function calls

- Tail call optimization (` name ;` compiles as jump to address of `name`
  rather than call to address of `name`)

- Implicit tail calls (with definitions `a ... : b ... ;`, invoking `a` will
  run the code for `a` then continue into the code for `b` because there is no
  `;` at the end of `a`)

- Conditional-return looping construct (`next`) for building tail call
  optimized recursive loops like this:
  ```
  : a 5 space  : b next 1 - 42 emit b ;  OK
  a *****  OK
  ```
  As part of this, I renamed my old `Next` VM instruction to `Return` (I'll
  say more on renaming and refactoring below, but not just yet). Also, `next`
  currently returns if the top item on the data stack is 0, but I intend to
  modify it to use the top item of the return stack. But, to do that, I need
  to finish some refactoring.

- Looping is constrained by a loop limit counter in the token-threaded inner
  interpreter. So, long loops will get interrupted with an error. My current
  measure for "long" is a constant that I selected experimentally to stop an
  infinite loop with no noticeable delay (less than a second). My goal is to
  support single-threaded cooperative multi-tasking with no noticeable input
  lag, so compute intensive tasks will need to be broken up into chunks that
  can complete quickly.

  Here is an example of a long running loop that increments the top item on the
  stack with each iteration:
  ```
  : a 0  : b 1 + b ;  ( b is attempting an infinite loop)  OK
  clearstack  OK
  a  E22 Loop too long
  .s  174762  OK
  ```

## Code examples

Here are some examples of things that work now:
```
( nested calls)
: f0 swap dup . over + ;  OK
: f1 f0 f0 f0 ;  OK
: fib 1 dup f1 f1 f1 . ; OK
fib 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 89  OK

( implicit tail call)
: start 1 .  : continue 2 . 3 . ;  OK
start 1 2 3  OK
continue 2 3  OK

( loops)
: 9down 9  : L1 next 1 - dup      . L1 ;  OK
: 9up 9    : L2 next 1 - 8 over - . L2 ;  OK
9down 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0  OK
9up 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  OK
```


## Refactoring

As I improve the compiler, I'm realizing that some of my initial design ideas
were impractical, and that my naming of instructions, registers, and words is
inconsistent. I've started the process of correcting those problems.

Also, I've almost reached the point where I can start refactoring features from
assembly language to Forth. I'm up to 2098 lines of amd64 assembly language
source code for libmarkab. The process of writing all this stuff is very fun,
but it's starting to feel awkward to navigate. There is more boilerplate and
repetition than I would like. It feels like there are opportunities to simplify
and factor things better. Also, I worry I'm coding too much from a mindset of
being a human C compiler. I'm getting very familiar with System V ABI register
assignments, which is fun and useful, but it feels like it's leading me off the
path and away from understanding the mindset of how to build old-school Forth
compilers.

I want to refactor some of the tasks I've been doing in assembly into Forth. In
particular, I want to move as much of the compiler as I can. This will, one,
help me understand the design of old-school Forth compilers, and, two, make it
easier to port my assembly code to ARM, WebAssembly, and perhaps RISC-V.


### Background: naming things

I've been reading about, and experimenting with, a variety of Forths off and on
for several years. Some of the most refined ideas about Forth compiling show up
in documentation for non-standard Forths meant for use with Chuck Moore's Forth
CPU designs. That stuff is subtle and tricky to understand -- challenging, but
worth it.

On the other hand, writing on older Forths in the lineage of figForth,
Forth-79, Forth-83, and ANS Forth is somewhat easier to find and read. But,
that stuff is oriented toward cross-platform portability on 8-bit and 16-bit
computers. The lineage of standard-compliant Forths has many good ideas and
many problematic limitations. The big trouble is the standards prioritized
backward compatibility with features designed for the severe limitations of
hobby computers from the late 1970's.

One of the important ideas from the standard Forths is to use `INVERT`, `0=`,
and `NEGATE` to avoid ambiguity around conflating different types of negation
(two's complement, one's complement, and boolean). The old (Forth-79 era) usage
of `NOT` along with -1 (true) and 0 (false) boolean values is very confusing.
Examples from old books of code using `NOT` won't run on a modern ANS Forth
without some extra work. It's hard to find the explanations of how that all
came to be.

In my code, I've been using a muddle of instruction, register, and word names
taken from reading about different Forth systems. I'm feeling the need to clean
up and reconcile inconsistencies in the terms and names I'm using. It's been
getting confusing.


### Background: error handling & memory protection

In the not too distant past, I spent a lot of time writing code in Rust. Then,
after that, I experimented with Ada for a while. Also, I'm generally aware of
categories of problems that consistently happen with languages such as C.

All of this has convinced me there are significant benefits to be had from
spending some CPU cycle overhead on language-level features to help with things
like bounds checking of array access.

I started off incorporating some ideas on memory protection into my initial
design of Markab Forth. But, as I work on the compiler, I see how I've probably
done too much. In particular, I think I went too far with factoring my
dictionary data structure into different memory areas.

My current dictionary has two linked lists, a dedicated memory area for
user-defined variables, and a dedicated area for compiled code of user-defined
words. The linked list stores names and pointers. I built my `Store` and
`Fetch` VM instructions with range checks so `!` and `@` can only read and
write in the dedicated memory area for user-defined variables. Currently, my
compiling words are implemented in assembly language, and they write to a
memory area that cannot be accessed with `!` and `@`. This is turning out to be
a problem.


### Goals

I want to start writing compiling words in Forth rather than assembly, so I
need to loosen up the memory access checks so that `!` and `@` will be usable
for building an assembler and compiler.

Consolidating the memory areas will make it possible for my Forth code to
corrupt its own code memory (with the VM's virtual address space) in a way
that's not currently possible. But, by the same measure, it will enable me to
write compiling words in Forth. I see now that I need to be able to do that.

I should be able to do this safely, without exposing the host OS process to
stack-smashing, because my compiled Forth code consists of tokens and literals
using the instruction set of my token-threaded inner interpreter, which
operates in a virtual address space.

If I merge the memory areas for the dictionary, user-defined variables, and
compiled words, I think it should be much more practical to build a compiler in
the traditional Forth way. That change will shrink my assembly language source
code, which will help with porting to ARM and WebAssembly.


## Next steps

1. Revise my use of names for registers, instructions, and words with an eye
   towards matching usage in non-standard Forths designed for Chuck Moore's
   Forth chips. I'm thinking mostly about CPU instruction sets, looping
   constructs, and memory access structured around blocks and bins. I don't
   plan to take much from colorForth as it's too much of a radical departure --
   from pretty much everything -- for my taste. Also, where it makes sense, use
   good ideas from the standard Forths because people are familiar with that
   stuff (basic math and stack ops, `.`, `."`, `emit` and friends, etc).

2. Start moving compiler features from assembly to Forth.

3. Explore options for writing string processing code in Forth. In particular,
   look at number formatting and control flow words that compile forward or
   backward jumps (how to match `IF` with `ELSE`?).

4. Explore options for defining control flow constructs that don't suck.
   Non-suck should be measured by considering a balance of legibility and
   simplicity of correct usage, runtime efficiency, simplicity of constructing
   the defining words, and the possibility of having the compiler report usage
   errors.

   Consider the possibility that standard Forth control flow constructs such as
   `DO..LOOP` and `IF..ELSE` should be entirely omitted. It might be possible to
   make do with control flow based on conditional returns and tail recursion.
   IIRC, Chuck Moore has expressed some enthusiasm for this approach in talks and
   interviews that I've seen online, though I don't remember where ¯\\\_(ツ)\_/¯.
