<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-04-11: Progress on inner interpreter'
---

## Token threaded inner interpreter

Over the past several days, I've been working on my token threaded inner
interpreter. The token interpreter is, approximately, a bytecode virtual
machine with the personality of a traditional Forth inner interpreter.

By "personality of a Forth inner interpreter", I mean:

1. The tokens act as opcodes for a virtual stack machine CPU.

2. The inner interpreter is written in AMD64 assembly language but structured
   as a Forth word. The inner interpreter's action is to run the compiled
   machine code implementation of some other Forth word. In this case, the
   "machine code" is a list of tokens for my virtual stack CPU.

3. Forth inner interpreters operate on code for words that have already been
   compiled.

4. Forth outer interpreters operate on buffers of Forth source code to parse
   text into words, look up words in the dictionary, and invoke the compiler or
   inner interpreter as needed.


## Compiling by hand

Since I'm in the process of bootstrapping a Forth system from scratch, I don't
have a compiler routine yet. So, I'm the compiler!

My be-the-compiler activities fall into three main categories:

1. Implementing virtual stack machine CPU operations: this takes the form of
   coding AMD64 assembly language routines to implement actions like pushing a
   byte literal on the stack, dropping the top item of the stack, formatting
   the top number on the stack into a hexadecimal string, or making a system
   call to have the host OS kernel write a buffer of bytes to stdout. These
   assembly routines make use of the full AMD64 general purpose register file,
   the System V ABI return stack (different from the Forth return stack), and
   subroutine calls by way of `JMP`, `CALL`, and `RET`.

2. Implementing the token interpreter: this takes the form of coding an AMD64
   assembly language routine to translate between bytecode (tokens) and calls
   to the routines implementing virtual stack machine operations. The
   translation from token to `CALL` happens by using the token values to index
   into a jump table. The jump table is a list of dword code addresses, created
   with NASM's `dd` pseudo-instruction, in the `.data` section of the object
   file assembled by NASM.

3. Compiling Forth source code into tokens: This takes the form of using NASM's
   `db` pseudo-instruction to encode a list of bytes into the `.data` section
   of the object file assembled by NASM. I write the Forth code in comments,
   then manually translate it to tokens by consulting the jump table.


Part of what I mean by being the compiler is that I have to think a lot about
object code generation and register assignments. For example, these are some of
the considerations I'm learning to juggle:

1. Working registers: Instructions like `XOR` and `MOV` encode to different
   numbers of bytes of object code depending on which combination of register,
   register width, and memory address I supply as operands. In particular, code
   for operating on `eax` and `al` tends to be very compact. So, I've switched
   to using `eax` as my main working register. I also commonly use `edi`,
   `esi`, `edx` and `ecx` as temporary registers.

2. Preserving values across calls: The System V AMD64 ABI specifies that `rbx`,
   `rsp`, `rbp`, `r12`, `r13`, `r14`, and `r15` are preserved across function
   calls. Since I need to make syscalls for IO, and because I anticipate using
   SysV-ABI libraries for X11 and audio, I've started following that convention
   in my assembly routines. I've found it convenient to use `rbp` and `rbx` for
   loop counters or other data that I want to persist across iterations of
   loops that contain `CALL` or `SYSCALL` instructions. Also, I use registers
   `r12`..`r15` to keep track of my virtual CPU's data stack and return stack
   (both distinct from the SysV-ABI stack using `CALL`, `RET`, and `esp`).

3. Preserving values across implicit arithmetic: Doing indirect address
   calculations with `LEA` or `MOV` can stomp on the contents of `eax` and
   `edx`, so I have to be careful about which temporary registers I use for
   what.

4. Optimizations: I've been using `objdump` to examine NASM's assembled object
   code and check for inefficiencies in my coding style. This feeds back into my
   register assignments, address calculations, and so on. My goal is to keep
   the code small, fast, and readable. So, there is balancing involved. I've
   been trying to make good use of registers and tail calls for implementing
   the VM operations, in order to avoid unnecessary memory accesses. I also try
   to keep the code compact so it will load quickly after branches.


## Refining my data stack implementation

I started off with a circular data stack, but I decided that wasn't worth the
hassle. So, yesterday, I switched to using a plain array because it's simpler
to code and easier to explain.


## On speed, robustness, and ease of coding

I've been thinking about system architectural choices that will contribute to a
good experience for coding in Markab's Forth outer interpreter, once that's a
thing that exists.

Yesterday, I implemented a new system for printing error messages, and I used
that to add overflow and underflow checking to my stack operations.

In general, I would like to build a system that inspires confidence, feels fun
and responsive to use, and generally minimizes confusion. Not sure on all the
details of how to do that.

Current thinking is that I would like to...

- Encourage and facilitate following Chuck Moore's guidance to factor words
  well, store large data in memory (not stack), limit the number of stack
  arguments passed to called words, and avoid peeking down into the stack.

- Make it relatively easy to detect coding errors and trace them back to the
  source code location where the problem originated.

- Make it difficult (ideally not possible) to accidentally corrupt memory,
  trigger a segfault, or mess with the host OS. I want the virtual CPU
  environment to behave as a relatively safe sandbox so that, a) you don't have
  to worry too much about damaging things with your code, and b) you don't have
  to worry too much about trying out code from strangers. This would include
  things like bounds checks for memory access, and being careful about how
  addresses for `JMP`, `CALL`, and `RET` are handled.

- Support UTF-8 Unicode text as a first-class data type. Traditional Forth
  vocabularies have words that enshrine the idea of characters being one byte
  large and using the ASCII encoding. Unicode support, if present, gets bolted
  on as an extra. I want to start off with a vocabulary of words that clearly
  distinguish between bytes and characters. Said another way, the old Forth
  standards use an outdated approach to text handling, and I don't intend to
  follow it.

- Plan for bitrot-resistance: Avoid machine-specific or OS-specific
  dependencies that could create vendor lock-in or sensitivity to commercial
  product upgrade cycles. This is a tradeoff between performance and resilience
  through time. The goal is for token code to rely on features that can be
  implemented easily in virtual machines for various platforms and
  architectures.


## Summary of current status

Current stack VM and token interpreter status:

1. Basic data stack operations work for pushing literals, drop, swap, etc.

2. Debug dumping stack contents in hex format works

3. Dot-quote works for printing string literals

4. Host OS syscalls work for `sys_write` and `sys_exit`

5. No math words yet

6. No text parsing words yet

7. No compiling words yet

8. No control flow words yet

9. Subject to those constraints, the token interpreter works


## Next steps

Things I'm thinking of doing soon:

1. Add math operations to the virtual stack machine

2. Improve the inner interpreter to support control flow (branch, loop, call)

3. Build a dictionary data structure and define words to manage it

4. Figure out how to use the `sys_read` syscall to read keystrokes (one
   keystroke at a time -- not line buffered -- so probably will need additional
   syscalls to configure terminal)

5. Build an outer interpreter and compiler words
