<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-04-22: POSIX, state machines, linking'
---

## Progress towards outer interpreter

I've been making good progress on building a simple line-buffered input loop
to feed input lines to a Forth REPL. This is kinda like a low-budget,
low-feature clone of a readline library.

My main goals have been:

1. Work around the fact that the `read()` function from stdlib, in the default
   Linux terminal driver configuration, will put lots of confusing garbage on
   the screen if you attempt to use arrow keys when typing a line of input.

2. Lay the foundation for non-blocking keyboard input so that I can have my
   Forth system do single-threaded multi-tasking.

My recent code is at [markab-lab/repl/].

[markab-lab/repl/]: https://github.com/samblenny/markab-lab/tree/main/repl


## POSIX termios terminal configuration

When you start a binary from the Debian 11 shell prompt, the terminal comes up
configured in "canonical" mode -- sometimes called "cooked" mode -- with line
buffering and key echo turned on. This is not good for building custom editor
UI, because key-combo shortcuts don't work and keyboard input will echo garbage
from ANSI escape sequences (arrow keys, F-keys, etc.).

One option would be to use ncurses or a readline library, but I don't want to
do that.

After lots of reading and experimenting, this is what I came up with:

1. Use the POSIX termios standard library functions `tcgetattr()` and
   `tcsetattr()` (see `man termios`) to turn off echo, canonical mode, and some
   other non-helpful features.

2. Use the POSIX `atexit()` standard library function to restore the canonical
   mode configuration after a normal process exit.

3. Configure signal handlers with the XOPEN `sigaction()` and `sigaltstack()`
   standard library functions to restore the original terminal configuration in
   case of a segmentation fault or illegal instruction error. This prevents
   the confusing situation of control getting returned to bash while the
   terminal is still configured for raw, non-echoed, character-buffered input.


## XOPEN signal handling

In order to use the `sigaction` and `sigaltstack` functions to set up a handler
for segmentation fault errors triggered by my assembly code, I had to do a
`#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500` before including some of the standard library
header files. This is some weird new C magic for me. Never had to do such
things before. As I understand it, this is part of a feature selection
mechanism where you can opt into POSIX and XOPEN standard library features that
go beyond what you get with the `-std=c99` compiler switch.

I found some documentation about this at:
- `man signal sigaction sigaltstack`
- `less /usr/include/features.h` (Debian 11)
- https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/007904875/basedefs/signal.h.html


## Linking C REPL with libmarkab

I got a Makefile working so that I can have a `main()` written in C that sets
up all the terminal stuff, exports wrappers for terminal IO stdlib functions,
and calls into my `libmarkab.o` Forth stuff. I'm currently assembling my Forth
inner interpreter code with `nasm` into `libmarkab.o`, then using the `clang` C
compiler to link it with my `main.c` code for terminal config, escape sequence
parsing, and line editing.


## ANSI escape sequences, state machines, line editing

On the Linux terminal driver, keyboard input comes encoded in ANSI escape
sequences. So, if you type an "a", you get one byte representing the ASCII code
for "a". But, if you type something like the F1 or Left-Arrow keys, you get a
multi-byte sequence, starting with the ASCII code for Escape (27). This can
lead to a lot of confusing garbage in the input stream unless you make your
code smart enough to parse and recognize out the normal escape sequences.

My state machine, for the most part, just filters out all the special keys and
key-combo shortcuts. Backspace, Enter, letters, numbers, and punctuation work,
but that's about it. I'm currently ignoring the arrow keys, F-keys, and such.

The one fancy thing I'm doing is using a special escape sequence to detect the
terminal size in rows and columns, then using the width in columns to do
automatic horizontal scrolling for input lines that are wider than the width of
the window.


## Next steps

The point of all this state machine and key-buffered input stuff is to feed
lines of input to my [as yet still imaginary] Forth outer interpreter without
causing it to block. That's where the state machines come in. I want to be able
to do multi-tasking in the Forth inner interpreter, for animation and audio
synthesis, while keyboard input is still active.

My next task is to build an outer interpreter on the assembly side, in
`libmarkab.nasm`.
