<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-06-13: Thoughts on immediate words'
link: 'https://samblenny.github.io/markab-dev-journal/2022-06-13.html'
published: '2022-06-13T00:00:00Z'
updated: '2022-06-13T00:00:00Z'
author: 'Sam Blenny'
copyright: 'Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny'
---

I've been thinking about immediate words as part of trying to define a good set
of core words for Markab. The benefit of immediate words is that they make it
possible for a simple compiler to provide high-level language features.

Immediate words are one of Chuck Moore's design innovations which are simple
and extremely useful, yet also subtle and confusing. This is one of the areas
in reading old Forth books where it has taken me a lot of effort to understand.
Achieving the perspective to appreciate the simplicity is tricky. Understanding
it well enough implement a compiler and define new immediate words is hard.

The essential property of an immediate word is that, when included in the
definition of a new word, it causes the compiler to run some of the immediate
word's code at compile time. The compile time code gets to use the stack and
CPU to calculate and decide what should go into the dictionary entry that is
being compiled. So, the immediate word's compile time code gets to determine
what the behavior of its runtime code should be.

For example, this mechanism allows for conditional blocks where, at compile
time while defining a word such as `: three? 3 = if{ do stuff }if ;`:

1. `if{` compiles a jump instruction with a temporary address into the
   dictionary, then pushes a pointer to the that address onto the data stack

2. `}if` at the end of the conditional block calculates the correct jump
   address, pops the pointer to the temporary address (pushed by `if{`), then
   patches the temporary address with the correct calculated address.

Many other things are possible using the immediate word mechanism. If you want
the compiler to support some new control flow construct or data structure, you
can define new immediate words to make that happen. You don't have to change
the language specification or the compiler.
