<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-07-20: Generating Pd messages in Markab'
link: 'https://samblenny.github.io/markab-dev-journal/2022-07-20.html'
published: '2022-07-20T19:13:00Z'
updated: '2022-07-20T19:13:00Z'
author: 'Sam Blenny'
copyright: 'Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny'
---

## Big picture: better Pd patching workflow

My current sub-quest with Markab is aimed at having a better way to experiment
with patches in Pd. When I write code, I have tools that make it convenient to
experiment with significant design changes and keep track of how projects
evolve over time. I would like to have a similar level of convenience for
working with Pd patches and song sequencing.

For easy design revisions to source code, my key technology is using plain-text
source code combined with git version control. With git, I can review what
changed when, or easily go back to a previous revision if an experiment doesn't
go well. I would like to have that same experience with Pd patches, but I also
want a way of creating patches by working at a higher level of abstraction than
what Pd's graphical user interface allows.

In my experience, writing code at a high level of abstraction to generate other
code at a lower level of abstraction tends to work well for making things that
are efficient and flexible. In game dev, sometimes people talk about this sort
of thing using the term "data driven design".

In this approach, you build a workflow to transform high-level abstractions
into code or data in the low-level format needed by some other tool: maybe a
game engine, Pd, a web browser, or whatever. The idea is that if you arrange
the data well ahead of time, your code does not need to do so much work at
runtime. So, it can be simpler and more efficient while still accomplishing
complex tasks.

In that context, I want a way to express Pd patches as high-level abstractions
written plain-text source code. Beyond that, I want to use Markab to generate
revisions to Pd patches interactively, in real time. That's what I'm working
toward.


## Mkbot: Markab gets irc powers

In my last post, I wrote about pdbot for sending messages to Pd over irc. Since
then, I also wrote mkbot which lets me chat with a Markab VM.

I've also been iterating on the Markab VM and kernel to make the experience of
talking to mkbot more smooth and conversational, relatively speaking. My main
focus has been to make things more concise, including a lot of work on error
handling. My aim is to have mkbot's replies fit in one (or a small number) of
lines.

Some of this past weeks changes include:

1. Loading of files, like: `load" kernel.mkb"`

2. Compiling and printing of string literals, like: `" Hello!" print cr`

3. Lots of work on error handling, including filename and line number for
   errors during the loading of a file

4. Performance optimizations: the current load time for the Markab kernel to
   compile its own source code is down to 4.5 seconds on a slow Intel Atom CPU.
   I'm pretty happy with that.


## Chatlog with mkbot

Here's an example of loading some utility words from my standard library,
checking memory usage, compiling the kernel, then checking memory again:

```
20:46:38 <@sam> " Hello, world!" print cr
20:46:38 -mkbot- Hello, world!
20:46:38 -mkbot-   OK
20:46:54 <@sam> load" stdlib.mkb"
20:46:54 -mkbot- OK
20:46:59 <@sam> free
20:46:59 -mkbot- 4 KB used  93% free  OK
20:47:06 <@sam> load" kernel.mkb"
20:47:10 -mkbot- OK
20:47:14 <@sam> free
20:47:14 -mkbot- 7 KB used  86% free  OK
```

I also wrote
[tonegen.mkb](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/samblenny/markab-lab/2022-07-20/pdbridge/tonegen.mkb),
a 988 byte Markab program to generate the Pd messages for the tone generator
from my last post. I won't post all of that here, but the key bit is listed
below. The thing I want to point out is about workflow. The way I did this was
to edit `tonegen.mkb` in emacs in one `tmux` pane, then ask mkbot in another
pane to load and run the `tonegen.mkb` file from `irssi`.

In the irc log, that process looks like this:

```
20:58:55 <@sam> load" tonegen.mkb"
20:58:55 -mkbot- OK
20:58:58 <@sam> go
20:58:58 -mkbot- clear; pd dsp 1;
20:58:58 -mkbot- obj 10 10 osc~ 440;   obj 35 40 receive vol;
20:58:58 -mkbot- obj 10 70 *~ 0;   connect 0 0 2 0;   connect 1 0 2 1;
20:58:58 -mkbot- obj 10 100 dac~;   connect 2 0 3 0;   connect 2 0 3 1;
20:58:58 -mkbot- obj 10 150 receive subsend;
20:58:58 -mkbot- obj 10 180 route vol;   connect 4 0 5 0;
20:58:59 -mkbot- msg 10 210 \$1 100;   connect 5 0 6 0;
20:58:59 -mkbot- obj 10 240 line 0 5;   connect 6 0 7 0;
20:58:59 -mkbot- obj 10 270 send vol;   connect 7 0 8 0;
20:59:00 -mkbot- send vol 0.3;
20:59:00 -mkbot-   OK
```

`go` is the name of a word I wrote to generate text for the messages to Pd,
which mkbot evaluated for me and sent the results of in their reply.

The code for `go` in the tonegen source code looks like this:

```
: go
  " clear; pd dsp 1;  " print cr
  " osc~ 440" obj  col+ " vol" rx col-  cr
  " *~ 0" obj  0 0 1 conn  connR  cr
  " dac~" obj  connL  connR  cr   row @ 2 + row  !
  " subsend"   rx   cr
  " route vol" obj  connL  cr
  " \$1 100"   msg  connL  cr
  " line 0 5"  obj  connL  cr
  " send vol"  obj  connL  cr
  " send vol 0.3;" print cr
;
```

What I hope you'll see is that, in the source code for my `go` word, mkbot is
helping me keep track of numbers to use as X and Y coordinates for boxes and as
inlet/outlet numbers for the `connect _ _ _ _;` messages to place wires.

Letting mkbot calculate the numbers to translate from `connL` to whatever
numbers Pd needs to see to accomplish the equivalent of, "connect the leftmost
outlet of the previous box to the leftmost inlet of the most recently added
box", is much easier than calculating it by myself.
