<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-05-29: Progress: new memory map!'
---

## The Big Refactor is done

For most of the last week, I've been working on a big refactor of markabForth's
memory layout, virtual memory addressing mechanisms, and compiling subroutines.
It's done. It works. The tests are all passing.

The point of the refactor was to make it possible to implement compiler and
dictionary features in markabForth source code, operating inside of the
sandboxed markabForth virtual memory area. It's a little tricky to explain
exactly what I mean by that, and why I feel it's important. Perhaps it would
help to give examples of things I want to be possible in markabForth along with
things that I want to be not possible. I believe the refactor supports the
goals listed below.

Things that should be possible:

1. No matter what happens with misbehaving Forth code, in spite of whatever
   mess or memory corruption occurs in the buffer and heap areas of virtual
   memory, the mechanism to type commands for the outer interpreter, using
   builtin words, should keep working. This will support convenient debugging
   and inspection of memory after problems.
 
2. Forth code should be able to use, inspect, and extend the linked list data
   structure for the dictionary. Examining the linked lists for the builtin
   vocabularies should be possible with read-only access. Working with the
   extensible vocabulary in the heap area should be possible with read-write
   access.

3. Using Forth code to extend the markabForth interpreters, assembler, and
   compiler should be possible. By writing more of such code in Forth rather
   than assembler, it will become easier to port the markabForth virtual
   machine to new host systems. Also, using this approach supports the
   traditional extensibility features of Forth -- you get to define your own
   words to compile and use new types of data structures, control flow words,
   or whatever you want.

4. Using Forth code to write debugging tools such as memory dumpers,
   disassemblers, and data structure inspectors should be possible, and it
   should be safely sandboxed. One consequence of this is that all the pointers
   for linked lists need to use the virtual address space of the markabForth
   virtual machine. It's actually kinda nice because printouts of 16-bit
   pointers are much easier to manually follow compared to typical 64-bit
   pointers from a modern host OS.


Things that should not be possible:

1. Forth code should not be able to directly access the memory space of the
   markabForth process on the host OS or to run arbitrary code -- no segfaults,
   no stack smashing, no syscalls -- none of that nonsense. This is a security
   measure intended to allow for a healthy community with sharing and archival
   of markabForth source code. Running markabForth code written by strangers
   should be a low-risk activity -- hopefully, about as safe as opening and
   reading a plain text file. (yes, I know this is a difficult goal)

2. It should be possible to write interesting Forth code, that might have
   serious bugs along the way, without crashing the markabForth interpreter or
   losing data. In particular, bugs should not result in losing code that is
   being edited. Have you seen the old DOS era PCs that came with giant reset
   buttons on the front? Or, on the old toaster Macs, a little plastic
   debugging insert that clipped into a ventilation slot? Those were necessary
   because it was too easy to corrupt memory and crash the whole system.

   I don't want people writing Forth code for markabForth to have to worry
   about such things. Bugs, even serious memory corruptions, should result in
   an error message followed by the normal prompt from the outer interpreter so
   you can inspect what went wrong and debug it.

   Modern programming languages often address this sort of challenge with all
   sorts of complicated features for type-checking, concurrency management,
   memory protection, and such. All that stuff is a hassle. It's not fun. The
   compiler always nags you. I want markabForth to let you make as much of a
   mess as you want in the heap area of its virtual memory space. That can
   include fancy trees, lists, or whatever sort of pointer-chasing mayhem you
   like. It can also include compiling and running token code, perhaps
   self-modifying, at runtime. But, the markabForth VM will sandbox that stuff
   so it cannot run for too long without passing control back to the event
   loop, and it cannot directly access resources of the host OS.


## Next steps

Here's my list of stuff that I think needs to happen relatively soon:

1. Implement new words for `CONSTANT`, `VARIABLE`, and `ALLOT`, along with all
   the relevant interpreter and compiler support so I can start using named
   variables and constants.

2. Extend my builtin vocabularies with constants for pointers and start offsets
   for important virtual memory regions and data structures (vocab linked
   lists, text buffers, heap, etc). Currently, I'm managing this stuff with
   NASM assembler macro definitions that are not easily accessible from Forth
   at the moment.

3. Be sure there is a safety feature in the dictionary search code so that
   creating a circularly linked dictionary list will not be able to cause an
   infinite loop.

4. Split dictionary into non-linked vocabularies with priority searching from
   builtin vocabularies (Forth, Interpret, Compile). Priority is to make sure
   the shell prompt works for builtins no matter what sort of memory corruption
   chaos has been happening in the heap, buffers, and compiler variables.
   It should not be allowed to redefine core words. Not sure about whether I
   should interfere with attempts to redefine the meaning of specific numbers.
   Probably that should not be allowed, but it depends on how difficult it
   would be to implement the restriction.

5. Add some better control flow words for loops and conditional branching. This
   might include `IF` and something to create for-loops. I want to have a
   for-loop construct with a counted iteration limit. I don't want a while-loop
   construct because coding patterns using unbounded loops are bad for
   real-time responsiveness. I want to encourage coding patterns that support
   low latency in a context of single-threaded, cooperative, non-preemptive
   multitasking. I want to avoid lag due to control flow getting blocked by
   long running loops.

Once those things are working, perhaps I can move some of the interpreter,
compiler, and assembler features from amd64 assembly language to Forth source
code. My libmarkab.nasm assembly source file is getting outrageously long --
over 2000 lines. I can't effectively scroll through it any more. My only viable
way to navigate is by searching for labels with my editor (which is actually
sorta convenient for refactoring). But, that isn't sustainable.

People won't want to hassle with reading through an 84KB file of assembly
source, and, I don't want to hassle with porting it to other architectures. I
need to reorganize libmarkab.nasm somehow. My preference would be to move a lot
of the functionality to screens of Forth code so it will be easier to port the
remaining assembler code for the markabForth virtual machine to ARM,
WebAssembly or RISC-V.
