<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-04-08: Stacks work; Next up, token threading'
---

## Stacks are working

Yesterday, in [markab-lab/asm/amd64/string1.nasm], I finished a
probably-good-enough data stack hexdump routine. The data and return stack
stuff should be adequate for the moment.

[markab-lab/asm/amd64/string1.nasm]: https://github.com/samblenny/markab-lab/blob/main/asm/amd64/string1.nasm


## Next up

### Thinking on how to do token threading

Debian 11 uses the Linux amd64 ABI, and all the old Intel CPU computers I have
to test this stuff on have 64-bit CPUs. So, in order to use my hardware
efficiently, in terms of performance per watt, it seems sensible to code
Markab's virtual stack machine emulation layer in 64-bit assembly with 64-bit
stack cells.

But, for the purposes of making little Forth-like app ROMs, 64-bits is way too
much. I want to try token threading for the application layer. Starting with
8-bit tokens (options for up to 32-bit literals) and 32-bit virtual cell size
seems reasonable.

To do that, I need to figure out how to build a token threaded inner
interpreter. This will probably involve a jump table.


### Command line and environment variable parsing

Eventually, I will need to consider command line arguments and environment
variables provided to my virtual machine emulator by `exec` according to the
Linux System V amd64 ABI. The arguments will be important for specifying a ROM
file (block file?) to load at startup, and potentially to obtain an X11 display
number. The environment variables could be useful for checking `TERM` to decide
whether it's okay to use ANSI escape codes on the terminal, or if output is
being piped to a file.

I don't want to deal with this yet. First I want to work on token threading.
