<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

# 2022-03-14: Thinking about CRT bezels & game carts

Been thinking a lot today about skeuomorphism, CRT bezels, and game cartridges.
Right now, Markab's wasm demo page has a small-ish "screen" area in the middle
of a big solid-color background.

For the reasons that I wrote about yesterday, I'm thinking it's a good idea to
keep the emulated screen size small. But, I would also kinda like to do
something fun but not distracting with the area around the screen. Making the
browser smaller would be possible but inconvenient, because I prefer a larger
size for general use. Also, I want to keep some visual distance between the
active emulated screen area and all the annoying UI clutter from the browser
tab and titlebar UI.

So, I've been asking myself two questions:

1. What could I put around the emulated screen that would be an improvement
   over an abrupt transition to a solid color background? (maybe weird
   non-rectangular Winamp style skins? maybe a Plan 9 style bezel then a
   user-configurable background image?)

2. What would be a good way to provide non-volatile storage for content that
   gets created in a wasm module? (UI like a game save before tab is closed?)


## Today's Visual Research

Those two questions led me to some ebay vintage computing research:

1. Deep dive on industrial design of old CRT monitors. Favorites mostly had
   two-tone beige bezels with rounded corners. That design, with a gradual
   low-contrast transition from the glass to the surrounding room, works well
   to avoid drawing my eye away from the content on the screen. Worst bezel was
   Commodore PET which has a super distracting design. Best bezel favorites
   were Apple IIc green phosphor and Compaq 2650 luggable.

2. Deep dive on industrial design of game console cartridges. I'm thinking
   about this in relation non-volatile storage to drag and drop of files
   between host system desktop and a tab running my wasm module. Kinda like
   how MakeCode .hex file downloads work with micro:bit.


## Background & Motivation

Having made some progress on getting pixels out from wasm to javascript and an
HTML canvas, I'm in a position where I could start on implementing string
blitting, keyboard input, and a threaded interpreter. But, my instinct is to
first detour to making the demo page less ugly and to arrange for some form of
non-volatile storage that's available to the wasm module.

In the past, with user testing of prototypes for brand new apps, one of the
problems I ran across is that people don't like it if you give them a fancy UI
for creating content but omit a way to save and load that content. Seems maybe
better to leave the UI looking obviously unfinished until the save and load
mechanism works?

My general plan for Markab is to build text, graphics, and perhaps sound,
editors in a threaded interpreter running inside of a wasm module. So, to start
off, the data from those editors will only exist in a memory buffer that will
vanish when the browser tab with the wasm module is closed or reloaded.

Yeah, I know about cookies and local storage. But, I want this to work well for
people like me who dislike the privacy implications of not clearing those out
on a regular basis. Given the way I use my browser, both cookies and local
storage are about as volatile as a wasm memory in a tab. Usually I test in a
Chrome incognito window, so local storage is useless to me.


## Conclusion: PNG files and skeuomorphic game cart slots?

What I want to try is having a skeuomorphic bezel thing that at least vaguely
resembles the old luggable PCs with drive bays next to the CRT. Or, maybe it
could be more like some kind of anime computer console thing.

The important part would be to have a clear, but chill, visual element on the
screen that communicates, "Hello, glad to meet you! I am a data slot that works
with drag-and-drop. If you want, you could feed me a data disc or a cart!"

I would really like it if the "carts" could be image files that the host OS
would present as thumbnails that actually looked like a disc or a memory card.
If the image files had a preview that clearly invoked thoughts of an anime
style data disc, or a game console cartridge, that would be pretty awesome. I
think this could work with PNG files pretty easily by putting the data in a
metadata chunk. With careful design, it might even be possible to access the
metadata field using copy and paste in the host OS's normal image editor.

Having at least two or three disc/cart slots could open the door to stuff like
plugging in a read-only Japanese font disc along with a writable "memory card"
if you wanted to write a document with Kanji. Reasonably comprehensive CJK
16x16px bitmap glyph coverage for Unicode is about 1-2MB uncompressed, so
that's why I'm thinking something like a read-only optical disc for font data.
Memory carts for general use could probably be much smaller.

It would also be nice to have an option to drag a desktop background image onto
a data disc slot and have it set as the background image for whole browser tab
holding the emulated screen. Doing this in a fullscreen tab could let you have
an i3 or Plan 9-ish looking desktop on an OS that would normally have a lot more
visual cruft around the edges of its windows.
