<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-05-27: Refactoring for new memory map'
---

## Work in progress

I'm working on a major refactor to arrange markabForth's memory blocks for
dictionaries, buffers, variables, and heap into a single coherent 64KB virtual
memory space. This should allow me to begin writing compiler code directly in
Forth, rather than doing everything the hard way in assembly.

Currently, I'm about half way done, or maybe it's really more like three
quarters. It's hard to tell. I've implemented the basic functionality for a
memory map with macro definitions for address ranges and relative addressing
with bounds checks. The main difference from before is that all my address
pointers in the dictionary linked lists are now 16-bit and refer to offsets
from the base of my 64KB virtual memory area.

Two days ago, I finished enough of the changes to compile the main binary
without assembler errors, but the shell was thoroughly broken. Formatting
numbers to print the stack was a big problem, but I re-implemented the number
formatter yesterday and it's fine now. I also fixed it so invoking predefined
words from the core vocabulary works again. But, the mechanism to define and
invoke new words is currently broken. I'm working on that presently.

My habit with git so far on this project has been to only commit and push
changes when I reach a stopping point with working code and passing tests.
Usually, that works for making a commit at the end of a day's coding session
because my changes are small-ish and incremental. This time, I've made a huge
revision to foundational system architecture level stuff, so it's taking longer
than I would like to get the markabForth shell back to a working state with
passing tests.

I'm probably going to make a new branch today for my broken work-in-progress
changes, then maybe do a squash commit to main once I have things working
again, in however many days that takes.


## Next steps

One of my big goals with this refactor is to begin implementing features using
Forth source code, rather than doing everything in assembly. By combining my
previously separate address spaces for dictionary, variables, and compiled
code, I've set the stage for using Forth code with `!` and `@` (store and
fetch) to create data structures and blocks of compiled code.
