<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-03-29b: Discover Forth + Mastering Forth'
---

## Finding more Forth books

Reading the pdf for "The Evolution of Forth" led me to a MacWorld November 1984
review of MacForth. The review's [bibliography] suggested "[Discover Forth]" by
Thom Hogan (1982) as a good introductory Forth book for people "who find
Brodie's humor distracting" -- referring to Leo Brodie's introductory book on
Forth. Brodie's tone and style are sufficiently irritating that I wouldn't feel
comfortable recommending his books to anyone, so this was welcome news.

Discover Forth covers Forth 79 in a concise introductory guide format. The
chapters end with a summary of key points, but do not include exercises.

In related searching, I also found [Mastering Forth] by Martin Tracy and Anita
Anderson (1989). Mastering Forth covers Forth 83 in an introductory textbook
format with end of chapter exercise problems. Back of the book has solutions to
the problems, which is nice.

[bibliography]: https://archive.org/details/MacWorld_8411_November_1984/page/n75/mode/1up
[Discover Forth]: https://archive.org/details/hogan_thom_discover_forth_learning_and_programming_the_forth/mode/1up
[Mastering Forth]: https://archive.org/details/mastering-forth-by-anderson-anita-tracy-martin-z-lib.org/mode/1up


### Discover Forth

I started reading Discover Forth and have skimmed through the whole thing. It's
pretty good. Hogan writes clearly, gets to the point, and refreshingly focuses
on explaining how a Forth System fits together as a whole. I would feel good
about recommending this to people as an intro to Forth book.

One of the things I'm trying to get clear in my mind at the moment is, what is
the basic anatomy of a minimal Forth System?

The proponents of ANS Forth won their struggle back in the 90's, but the
results they came up with are useless to me. ANS is crufty and very complex.
Much of the stuff written about Forth since ANS in 1994 is biased towards using
Forth as a cross-platform application programming language, with heavy
libraries, on top of other operating systems. I want to learn how to do a
minimalist implementation that's closer to the old Forth bare metal
bootstrapping thing in mindset, but tweaked toward Unicode, modern 32-bit and
64-bit CPUs, and wasm32 or Linux+X11 as the substrate.

For example, I want to understand specifically what data structures and
algorithms could be used to implement a minimal dictionary, data and return
stacks, assembler, compiler, metacompiler, inner interpreter, and outer
interpreter. Also, what set of words is necessary to implement in machine
language to form the "nucleus" or "kernel" of a Forth System?

In Appendix B, page 135, the "Required Word Set" chart lists the following
words under the "Nucleus Words" heading:

```
!  *  */  */MOD  +  +!  -  /  /MOD  0<  0=  0>  1+  1-  2+  2-  <  =  >  >R
?DUP  @  ABS  AND  C!  C@  CMOVE  D+  D<  DEPTH  DNEGATE  DROP  DUP  EXECUTE
EXIT  FILL  I  J  LEAVE  MAX  MIN  MOD  MOVE  NEGATE  NOT  OR  OVER  PICK
R>  R@  ROLL  ROT  SWAP  U*  U/  U<  XOR
```

The "Interpreter Words" heading lists:
```
#  #>  '  (  -TRAILING  ,  79-STANDARD  <#  >IN  ?  ABORT  BASE  BLK CONTEXT
CONVERT  COUNT  CR  CURRENT  DECIMAL  EMIT  EXPECT  FIND  FORTH  HERE  HOLD
KEY  PAD  QUERY  QUIT  SIGN  SPACE  SPACES  TYPE  U.  WORD
```

The "Compiler Words" heading lists:
```
+LOOP  ,  ."  :  ;  ALLOT  BEGIN  COMPILE  CONSTANT  CREATE  DEFINITIONS  DO
DOES>  ELSE  FORGET  IF  IMMEDIATE  LITERAL  LOOP  REPEAT  STATE  THEN
UNTIL  VARIABLE  VOCABULARY  WHILE  [  [COMPILE]  ]
```

The "Device Words" heading lists:
```
BLOCK  BUFFER  EMPTY-BUFFERS  LIST  LOAD  SAVE-BUFFERS  SCR  UPDATE
```

Appendix F on page 143 lists the "Assembler Word Set" as:
```
;CODE  ASSEMBLER  CODE  END-CODE
```


### Mastering Forth

Mastering Forth takes more of a textbook approach to comprehensively explaining
Forth 83. I've skimmed through it looking mostly for clues about implementation
details.

Chapter 5, starting on page 39, describes file and screen editors for several
old Forth systems: MacForth, UR/FORTH, L&P F83, PolyFORTH, MasterFORTH, and
ZEN.

Chapter 11, starting on page 146, covers defining words, including discussion
of:
```
CREATE  DOES>  ALLOT  '  EXECUTE  >BODY  VARIABLE  CONSTANT  [']
```

Chapter 12, starting on page 160, covers compiling words, including discussion
of:
```
:  ;  EXIT  IMMEDIATE  HERE  [  ]  [COMPILE]  LITERAL  COMPILE
BRANCH  ?BRANCH  <MARK  <RESOLVE  >MARK  >RESOLVE
```
along with `I` register and `STATE` variable.

Chapter 13, starting on page 174, covers input stream and mass storage,
including discussion of:
```
LOAD  BLK  TIB  >IN  STOPS  WORD  FIND  .(  )  PARSE  STRING
BLOCK  LIST  CMOVE  UPDATE  BUFFER  INDEX
```

Chapter 15, starting on page 210, covers assemblers and metacompilers, including
discussion of:
```
:  ;  CODE  NEXT  END-CODE  C;  #
FORTH  EDITOR  ASSEMBLER  DEFINITIONS  VOCABULARY  ALSO  ONLY
CREATE  DOES>  HERE  QUIT  ABORT  ABORT"
T@  T!  TC@  TC!  TP  THERE
```
