<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-03-17: Pandoc .md to .html, Forth books'
---

## First attempts at Pandoc markdown to HTML conversion

I'm thinking maybe Pandoc would be a good option for converting these dev journal
files from markdown to static html.

This is on Debian 11 (Bullseye):

```
$ sudo apt install pandoc
$ man pandoc
```

Notes from `man pandoc`:

- Document fragment conversion: `pandoc -o out.html in.md`
- Standalone document conversion: `pandoc -s -o out.html in.md`
- Pandoc will detect formats from .html and .md
- To specify markdown dialects: `-f commonmark`, `-f gfm` (github flavor),
  `-f markdown` (Pandoc markdown), `-f markdown_mmd` (MultiMarkdown)
- `--list-input-formats`
- `--list-output-formats`
- `--list-extensions[=FORMAT]` where FORMAT default is `markdown`
- Check syntax highlight lang options: `pandoc --list-highlight-languages`

First attempt (pandoc markdown):

```
$ pandoc --wrap=preserve --strip-comments 2022-03-08.md
<h1 id="first-steps">2022-03-08: First Steps</h1>
<p>Started a new repo for this project that I’ve been thinking about for years.
Took me a while to come up with a name. Settled on Markab.</p>
<p>General goal is to make portable multimedia creation and playback system
suitable for making language learning apps, but with enough flexibility to
be used for other purposes.</p>
```

Hmm... not bad.

Tried it again with a preview of all my journal entries so far. Seems like
pandoc markdown was not converting lines starting with `- ` for bullet lists 
into `<ul><li>..</li>...` lists. Tried again using `-f gfm` and it seems to
work better:

```
for f in *.md; do
  echo
  echo "=== $f === "
  pandoc -f gfm --wrap=preserve $f
done | less
```

That looked pretty good. But, need to figure out how to do header and footer
template...

Turns out that adding a YAML block to the .md files to set metadata for the
template engine complicates things a bit. Using `-f gfm` doesn't play nice
with the yaml block. Parsing glitches and adds a horizontal rule tag. This
seems to work for getting pandoc markdown to handle lists better:

```
pandoc -f markdown+lists_without_preceding_blankline --wrap=preserve in.md
```

The trick is to request the `+lists_without_preceding_blankline` extension.

Possible alternate method to let pandoc auto-detect document title from the
h1 tag:

```
pandoc ... --shift-heading-level-by=-1 ... in.md
```

Yes! That works!


## Converting *.md to html with make and pandoc

I got a Makefile working to convert all my .md journal entries into html
using a template file.

Pandoc [template syntax docs] are pretty helpful.

[template syntax docs]: https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#template-syntax

My template looks like this:

```
<!DOCTYPE html><html lang="en"><head><meta charset="utf-8">
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1">
<meta name="description" content="Dev Journal documenting work on Markab">
<title>$title$</title>
<link rel="preload" href="../style.css" as="style">
<link href="../style.css" rel="stylesheet"></head><body>
<header><a href="../">Markab Dev Journal</a></header>
<main>
<h1>$title$</h1>
$if(toc)$<hr>$toc$<hr>
$endif$$body$
</main><footer>
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
 — License: <a href="../LICENSE.txt">CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0</a>
</footer></body></html>

```

The `$title$`, `$toc$`, and `$body` are Pandoc [interpolated variables], which
it replaces when rendering the template. The `$title$` string comes from a YAML
metadata block at the start of each markdown file. Pandoc generates `$toc$`
with a table of contents ul element because I gave it the switch in the
makefile to ask for that. The `$body$` string comes from the document fragment
generated by converting a markdown file.

[interpolated variables]: https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#interpolated-variables

The key parts of my Makefile look like this:

```
.SUFFIXES:
.PHONY: all clean

MD_FILES   = $(wildcard 20??-??-??*.md)
HTML_FILES = $(MD_FILES:.md=.html)
PD_TEMPLATE = pandoc_template.html
PD_FMT = -f markdown+lists_without_preceding_blankline+autolink_bare_uris
PD_OPT = --wrap=preserve --strip-comments -s --toc

all: $(HTML_FILES)
	@echo done
clean:
	rm -f $(HTML_FILES)

.SUFFIXES: .md .html
.md.html:
	pandoc $(PD_FMT) $(PD_OPT) --template=$(PD_TEMPLATE) -o $@ $<
```

The makefile is perhaps a bit too clever. It might be less mysterious if I just
wrote a shell script. To understand what's going on, you need to read about GNU
make's wildcard globbing for variables and about make "inference rules" which
are associated with `.SUFFIXES`.

Anyhow, to convert a new markdown entry to html with pandoc, I run

```
make
```

To rebuild the whole set of journal entries when I want to change the template,
I use `make clean` first and add a `-j` to do a parallel build:

```
make clean
make -j
```

For now, starting a new entry is manual, and updating the index is manual. I
would like to add a make target to automatically generate a journal entry
file. Same for automatically generating the index file.


## CSS Notes

These are good for getting list items aligned nicely:
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Styling_text/Styling_lists
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/list-style

This is good for adjusting spacing between a bullet list directly under a
paragraph (like this one right here):
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Adjacent_sibling_combinator


## Books on implementing forth systems

IPS
- Meinzer, IPS: High Level Programming of Small Systems, University of Marburg, 1978
- https://github.com/amsat-dl/IPS/blob/master/Documentation/IPS%20-%20The%20Book.pdf
- https://amsat-dl.org/en/ips-high-level-programming-of-small-systems-for-the-amsat-space-projects/

Threaded Interpretive Languages
- Loeliger, Threaded Interpretive Languages: Their Design And Implementation, Byte Books, 1981
-  https://archive.org/details/R.G.LoeligerThreadedInterpretiveLanguagesTheirDesignAndImplementationByteBooks1981

Stack Computers: The New Wave
- Koopman, Stack Computers: The New Wave, Mountain View Press, 1989
- https://users.ece.cmu.edu/~koopman/stack_computers/index.html (pdf & html)

Household Tales by Brothers Grimm (bonus book)
- The Project Gutenberg eBook of Household Tales by Brothers Grimm, by Jacob
  Grimm and Wilhelm Grimm
- https://www.gutenberg.org/files/5314/5314-h/5314-h.htm#chap55
- IPS uses "RUMPELSTILZCHEN" as a magic phrase to escape its limited input mode
  in a manner similar to typing the ESC key in vi's insert mode.
