<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-04-05b: AMD64 ABI details + Agner Fog'
---

## AMD64 System V ABI on 16-byte RSP alignment

Reading through the [NASM manual], I found a puzzling statement in chapter 12
that, "*64-bit platforms ... require that the stack is 16-byte aligned at the
entry to a function ... the stack pointer (RSP) needs to be aligned on an odd
multiple of 8 bytes before the CALL instruction.*"

[NASM manual]: http://www.nasm.us/xdoc/2.15.05/nasmdoc.pdf

When I searched for more information about 16-byte stack alignment, the
explanations related to moving data between SSE2 registers and stack memory. It
seems the reason for the requirement is to facilitate convenient allocation of
aligned local variables to use with 128-bit vector instructions. Apparently,
mis-aligned allocations can result in page faults, extra cache misses, and
problems with using the ALU. This [answer] to "*Why does the x86-64 / AMD64
System V ABI mandate a 16 byte stack alignment?*" on Stack Overflow was
helpful.

[answer]: https://stackoverflow.com/a/49397524


### Method to ensure stack alignment

Some of the sources on stack alignment mentioned that `and rsp, -16` is a way
to ensure the stack is 16-byte aligned. But, that relies on being able to
restore the old value of `rsp`. I think something approximately like this was
being suggested:

```
some_function:  ; enter function
push rbp        ; save caller's base pointer
mov rbp, rsp    ; save stack pointer so it's possible to pop rbp before ret
...             ; do stuff that might leave rsp mis-aligned
and rsp, -16    ; align rsp
call foo_func   ; make call that needs 16-byte aligned stack
...
mov rsp, rbp    ; get the old stack pointer back
pop rbp         ; restore callee's rbp
ret
```

Using this technique between Forth-style subroutine threading and C-FFI calls
might be necessary when I want to call out to X11 or audio libraries. I suppose
maybe I should do it for syscalls too? Haven't seen that requirement mentioned,
but it seems like the same motivating principle might apply to kernel code.


## Agner Fog

The sources I found on stack alignment mentioned [Agner Fog's website] as an
excellent source of documentation on optimizing ia64 and amd64 assembly code.

[Agner Fog's website]: https://www.agner.org/optimize/
