<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-03-11: Rework Framebuffer Interface'
---

Working on defining a good framebuffer interface between wasm and js.

Decided to arbitrarily start with the constraint of a 64KB maximum video ram
size ("the framebuffer") and let everything else follow from there. The choice
of 64KB is meant to accommodate a byte addressable pixel buffer on a stack
machine with 16-bit address bus width. I'm thinking that the video ram could
go on its own bus, separate from regular program memory.

Would like to leave the door open to supporting different types of video modes.

Current configuration for testing is medium sized, medium DPI LCD monitor with
simulated display hardware of html canvas with 2x CSS scaling ("2x zoom"). This
gives convenient readability and a mildly pixelated look. Maybe the zoom could
be adjustable between 1x, 2x, and 4x to accommodate different hardware display
sizes and DPI ratios.

Constellation of uses I would like to potentially support:

1. Monochrome 1-bit per pixel to cover small hardware devices or large display
   areas on a PC. This could work for making a big text editor, or perhaps a
   cheap hardware synth/sequencer with a Cortex M0/M4 dev board and OLED or LCD
   from Adafruit. Resolutions could range from as small as 128x32 or 128x64 on
   cheap OLED up to 1024x512 on laptop or PC.

2. Uxn compatibility mode with 2-bits per pixel that could be implemented on
   lots of different hardware. This could handle up to 640x400 with 4 colors,
   supporting uses like text editor with color syntax highlighting, game with
   kinda big map, painting moderately big images, and so on.

3. Color picker mode with ability to display many colors at once for the
   purpose of building themes and color palettes. Assuming 8-bits per pixel,
   this could support resolution of up to 256x256. With 4-bits per pixel, the
   resolution could be up to 360x360.

To do all this, the data structure on the wasm side could look like...

Frame buffer:
- FB_BYTES: array of uint8_t[65536], "the video ram", "the framebuffer"
- FB_SIZE: 65536

Frame buffer configuration registers:
- FB_WIDE: pixels per horizontal line (limit of X axis)
- FB_HIGH: vertical lines per screen (limit of Y axis)
- FB_DEEP: pixel bit depth in units of bits per pixel
- FB_ZOOM: scaling factor to be applied by the display driver, "zoom"


### Links (handling wasm-js shared memory, CSS scaling for html canvas, js shifts, etc.):
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/DataView/getUint32
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/DataView/getUint8
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTMLCanvasElement/getContext#parameters
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/CanvasRenderingContext2D/scale
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Unsigned_right_shift
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Right_shift


### Debugging the framebuffer code

I started off just exporting a function from the wasm module to return a
pointer to the FB_BYTES framebuffer array. That worked. It was simple. Easy.
Reliable...

So, of course, I decided that instead I should export the FB_BYTES and FB_SIZE
symbols and let the javascript wasm loader link against them. Perhaps a big
mistake? This is turning into an epic quest. Seems like the exports are
pointers, so I need to figure out how to dereference them properly into the
wasm shared memory buffer. That's turning into a major hassle. I can see the
correct values in the shared buffer when I dump them to the console log, but my
code comes back with the wrong values. Maybe there's some kind of weird
endianness or off by one thing happening?

Anyhow, along the way, as I'm flailing around trying to make sure I'm
initializing the frame buffer with values that will be recognizable if I access
them by with the wrong alignment or endianness from javascript, LLVM clang and
lld decided they wanted to optimize some of my code by linking against
`memset`. So... yay! Now I get to do a side quest to implement memset!

Took me a while to discover the expected function signature and now to make it
work. The console log showed a wasm module initialization error about missing
memset in 'env', which is the object LLD expects to link against. Chrome
DevTools disassembly for the wasm module showed it wanted to find:

```
(import "env" "memset") (param i32 i32 i32) (result i32)
```

I thought maybe I could convince clang and llvm to skip that import by
providing a `void * memset(void * dest, int val, int len)` function in C. But,
I wasn't able to get that working. I don't understand very well about the
details of how LLVM handles intrinsic functions, linking against stdlib, or
whatever it was attempting to accomplish. I brought this on myself by supplying
the `-Os`, `-nostdlib` and `-Wl,--allow-undefined` flags to clang. But, those
are kinda important for getting the wasm module to work. There's probably a more
subtle combination of linker flags to suppress the optimization that wanted to
link memset. But, for now, that's still a mystery.

Workaround is to just provide the silly javascript memeset implementation to
make the linker happy. This works: `function memset(dest, val, len) {...}`.

**Update:** Turns out it was indeed an endianness problem like I suspected. I
failed to read the docs for DataView.getUint32() carefully enough. Turns out it
defaults big-endian unless you pass `true` for the optional `littleEndian` arg.
