<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-03-12: Rework dev journal'
---

This journal started as a single markdown file alongside of my code, but, at
the rate I'm adding notes, that file would quickly become unmanageably long.
So, gonna try making one file per day along with an html index so they are all
easy to view as plain text. Also decided on CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0 as my license for
this writing rather than the MIT license that I'm using for the code.

For the html index file's css colors, I changed my old method of using
RGB hex constants for colors. Now there is a color theme rule at the top of the
styles that defines color theme variables, and the other rules use `var()` to
reference colors from the theme.
 
Used Lighthouse in Chrome DevTools to check on color contrast ratios. It wasn't
happy with the footer. Had trouble finding the color contrast checker that
the documentation said was supposed to show up in the DevTools color picker.

Seems the low contrast warning thing only shows up for the `color` property,
and not for `background-color`. Awkward because I ws trying to adjust the
background to be darker.

Had some trouble with my markdown file links triggering a download instead of
just loading into a text file viewer. Fixing my ruby webserver script to
use "text/markdown" as the content type for .md files seems to make it work.

Verified the content type by using netcat to do a manual HTTP request:
```
$ nc localhost 8000
GET http://localhost:8000/2022-03-08.md HTTP/1.1

HTTP/1.1 200 OK 
...
Content-Type: text/markdown
...
```
Before my fix to the script, it was using "application/octet-stream"


Links:
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Using_CSS_custom_properties
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/color_value#color_keywords
- https://web.dev/color-contrast/
