<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

# 2022-03-16: Workspace layouts, refining priorities

Been thinking today on workspace layouts, data discs, and, to a lesser extent,
on console layouts. More abstractly, been thinking on interrelationship of
three goals for Markab.

The three interrelated goals of today's pondering:

1. Encouraging flow state and insulating creative process from unhelpful
   distractions. Prune UI cruft. Minimize screen space dedicated to controls
   that are not needed. Facilitate arranging of workspace for mood and
   productivity (coordination of wallpaper, music player, reference media,
   working windows, etc.).

   This implies a theming engine and perhaps scripted integration with the host
   OS desktop wallpaper, music player, window manager (dark mode), and such.
   Idea is to facilitate workspace equivalent of theatrical set and lighting
   change between acts of a play. Lights go down, set rolls off, set rolls on,
   lights come up in new configuration. Suddenly, like magic, you're in a
   different place. Sitting down to work at computer could be that way.

   On large displays, it might be appropriate to have significant space
   dedicated to desktop wallpaper, reference images, and perhaps a skeuomorphic
   virtual computer console or desktop, enclosing the active display area of
   the tool windows. That might take the form of 3D renderings, or perhaps
   illustrations in different styles. Important question here is, what do you
   want to see on your workspace to help you get in the right mood and focus on
   making the thing you want to make?

2. Facilitate productivity on available computers. Thinking here of priority on
   supporting older gear. But, still want to include people who may have
   recently purchased modern equipment. Mood is, meet people where they are.
   Encourage use of existing gear. Smooth and simplify process of getting
   started with surplus gear. Mitigate factors prompting purchase of newly
   manufactured gear.

   This implies a central focus on lightweight tools that will work on low
   resolution screen, but also the need to consider how to adapt those tools
   for use on modern workstations with high-resolution displays and fast CPUs.
   Need to plan for productivity across the continuum of having very little
   display space at low DPI, up to having too much high-DPI display space.

3. Facilitate sharing of finished works and exploration of interactive
   experiences. For images and sound files, probably fine to rely on normal
   host OS image viewers and audio players. But, for interactive experiences
   like games or SRS language practice assistant, there needs to be a
   cross-platform runtime environment that is easy to install and run. Best
   option for this is probably web page with WASM module runtime player and
   convenient method for loading rom image files into the player.

   Important that the rom images, and resource files for the runtime player
   webpage, can be easily downloaded and served from localhost for offline use.
   This implies need for supporting a simple static-file HTTP server. HTTP
   server needs to be cross platform.

When we make things on a computer, it is often necessary to use at least two
windows: one for reference material (docs, images, code, whatever), and one for
a document we are editing. Often we need many windows. Juggling windows, and
being exposed to their design elements (menus, titlebar, corners, borders,
tabs, tool palettes,...) affects mood and creative focus. Same applies to
desktop wallpaper and music.

Recently, unrelated to Markab, I created two scripts on my main computer which
I can use to conveniently switch my desktop wallpaper and OS dark-mode feature
between day and night configurations. Now, with a few keystrokes, I can adjust
my workspace to be more comfortable according to ambient light in the room. My
previous method required many clicks to navigate menus and control panels, all
covered in branding and "design". My new method lets me avoid that clutter.

Using Markab should feel like that. It should let you quickly summon workspace
configurations with the right mood to suit the project, computing device,
ambient light in the room, and so on.


## Conclusions

Probably Markab should have features to help coordinate the appearance of the
entire workspace on a display. For colors and themes, thinking about video
modes on the emulated VM screens is too narrow of a focus. Scope of my goals
includes the overall experience of using Markab to make stuff.

Additional display coordination features could include:
- Wallpaper: change desktop wallpaper or browser tab background image
- Skins: change window border for VM screens, including Plan 9 style thick
  borders and possibly bezel images using [9-slice scaling]
  [9-slice scaling]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/9-slice_scaling
- References: display PNG or JPEG beside the VM screen(s) to use as reference
  images for drawing and painting
- Onion skinning: display PNG or JPEG under VM screen(s) with opacity controls
  to use for tracing or animation

Also need to consider how to make a smooth experience for moving projects
across devices with diferent display resolution and DPI-ratio combinations.

Possible features for adapting to different display hardware:
- Zoom: 1x, 2x, 3x, etc. zoom control for integer ratio scaling of VM screens
- DPI detection: perhaps automatically select default zoom based on DPI-ratio

Need to consider to what extent I want to support phone and tablet displays.
For painting and drawing, having things work on an iPad might be pretty cool.


## Refining Priorities

Some of the things I was thinking in the past couple weeks seem less suitable
now...

1. Building Markab to be compatible with ARM dev boards or small hardware
   displays seems less of a good idea. Supporting very small displays would
   interfere with optimizing for a nice cross-platform experience on computers
   with display size in the neighborhood of 720p or 1080p.

2. Emulating 8-bit or 16-bit operations seems at odds with the goal of using
   limited battery power efficiently. Some people enjoy preserving and using
   historical hardware with 16-bit CPUs. I see that as a matter of taste. To
   me, reading about very old computers is interesting, but restoring them or
   relying on their proper functioning is not. Every target platform that I
   would consider potentially suitable for use with Markab has at least a
   32-bit CPU. Many have 64-bit.

   Markab is about seeking creative sanctuary away from waste, cruft, bitrot,
   intrusive branding, rent-seeking, overdesigned nonsense, and random
   failures. Sanctuary from waste is a broad concept including things like
   conserving power, conserving bandwidth, and being respectful of your own and
   other people's time and emotional energy. The process of getting to that
   place of sanctuary includes activities that resemble some of what retro
   computing enthusiasts do. But, those two things are not the same! Markab is
   about setting up favorable conditions for productive creativity. The point
   is to be creating new work in a new context.

   Part of that idea of sanctuary, avoiding random failures, leads me to prefer
   used business class computers with medium-spec components and a manufacture
   date within the previous 10 years (relative to time of acquisition by gift,
   auction, or whatever). Beyond about 10 years, or with low-end consumer grade
   junk, or with high-spec performance workstations, problems are much more
   likely. Such systems tend to give more trouble with hardware failures,
   difficulty obtaining parts, and long-term availability of linux driver
   support.

   Comparing my ideas about hardware support to Devine's ideas about hardware
   for Uxn and Varvara... As I understand it, Devine has a taste for designing
   to enable portability that extends back toward rather older hardware. They
   also mention interest in paper computing, and in using 64KB addressing
   limits as a creativity inspiring constraint. I also care about small program
   size, but my care is rooted in enthusiasm for building simple, reliable,
   efficient things that work reliably. For me, small binary size is mostly a
   side-effect of that process, rather than a goal on its own. The things I
   like to measure have more to do with performance, efficiency, and
   correctness of overall systems.

   As I understand it, Uxn's design uses 8-bit instructions and a 16-bit
   address bus to facilitate easy porting, or from-scratch implementations, of
   the the stack machine CPU. This is meant to allow long-term preservation of
   code and portability across many platforms (I like these goals). The API and
   spec for application developers happen at the level of the CPU instruction
   set documentation, source for a C assembler, and source for a self-hosting
   assembler.

   For Markab, I intend to aim for similar ease of portability and long term
   bitrot resistance, but skip the step of emulating a virtual CPU. Instead, I
   want to implement a forth system, with its kernel written in C99, on top of
   a hardware abstraction layer (HAL). The HAL will isolate the Forth kernel
   from platform-specific driver details of display, audio, real time clock,
   timers, file IO, and such. Porting to a new platform should be limited to
   implementing HAL functions to make calls to suitable hardware IO libraries
   on the target platform.

   One big difference between my perspective, and Devine's as I understand it,
   is that I'm perfectly content to forego building a self-hosting assembler. I
   feel comfortable basing my plans for portability and resilience on the
   assumption that somebody else will provide a good optimizing C compiler for
   any hardware platform worth porting to. Normally, in recent decades, that's
   been how it works.

   Another difference is, I want to define my API spec for application
   developers at the level of built-in words for my forth system. The built-ins
   dictionary will cover basics like math operations and control flow, but it
   will also cover graphics, sound, and input devices. There will be words for
   things like sprite blitting and painting Unicode strings. Implementation of
   performance critical built-in words will happen in C99, so, for example,
   sprite blitting should happen at the speed of compiled C. Forth applications
   will run run slower than C because of the indirection of the threaded
   interpreter. But, overall, I expect the potential performance should be
   pretty good.

3. On how small is small enough?... As far as I can tell, motivation for the
   goal of extremely tiny rom images seems to be mostly about taste and
   enjoyment of the intellectual challenge. I view shrinking binaries as a
   diminishing returns activity. Bloated is bad. Small has noteworthy practical
   advantages. But, going from small to tiny can require lots of hard work and
   awkward compromises. Maybe not worth it. My taste leans more toward color
   graphics, international fonts, and algorithms designed for 32-bit math
   operations. That stuff is easier to do efficiently if I allow for sometimes
   working with ram-resident data structures larger than 64KB.

   For my purposes, the main file size considerations are:
   - Total size of project's git repo after a few years of active development.
     If possible, I want this to be under 10MB so git clone runs fast
   - Page load time for html wasm demo pages. I want this to be fast. Less than
     2 seconds on a typical cheap US broadband connection is nice.

   In that context, there is definite advantage to keeping the total page size
   for all resources well under 1MB. For page load time, there is not much
   noticeable difference between 4KB, 32KB, or 64KB. On the other hand, that
   size range gets more interesting when considering the cumulative effect of
   commits on git repo size.

   When I commit a new .wasm file, it goes into the git history as a binary
   blob, which is less efficient than committing a small diff to a text file.
   Supposing I average one release per week, with an average .wasm file size of
   4KB, that adds 52*4/1024 = 0.2MB per year to my git repo history.

   Increasing to file size of 32KB would add 1.6MB per year. That's probably
   okay, but I wouldn't want the rate to get much bigger. On the other hand, if
   bundled a 16px CJK Unicode font into the .wasm file, commit size would go up
   to about 1.5MB, adding about 78MB per year to the repo. That's way too much.

   What I conclude from those estimates is, I'd be very happy if I could fit a
   HAL, forth kernel, and built-ins dictionary into a .wasm file of 16KB. Even
   32KB would be pretty good. Larger would be possible if necessary.

   Including a whole CJK Unicode font in the same binary as the HAL and forth
   kernel would be bad. Probably the thing to do is split the glyphs up into a
   set of smaller language pack rom files that could be loaded as libraries for
   use along side of application rom images. The language pack font roms would
   not need to be updated often, so their total long term contribution to git
   repo size might be on the order of 2MB or less.
