<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-03-14b: Starting to implement load & save'
---

Yesterday I was thinking about trying to have Markab support drag-and-drop file
load and save by putting ROM and save file data in PNG metadata chunks. I now
believe that would be somewhat risky. Not sure if the pro of cool preview icons
outweighs the con of OS tools potentially stripping metadata. Possible better
options include just using regular file extensions like .txt, .fs, .wav, etc.,
or perhaps coming up with a new file extension to store a snapshot of the VM
memory image.

After reading about the misadventures of people who attempted to store long-ish
strings in PNG or JPEG metadata, it sounds like that's not a reliable thing to
do. Apparently it's common for email clients, image exporters, and other tools
to resize images and strip image metadata to make the files smaller. This
reportedly tends to lead to loss of metadata when people attempt to share the
files between devices. Hard to say how much of a problem that might be. Seems
like, the safer option might be encoding save data into the pixel data.


## Tradeoffs of WASM vs. native

Thinking through all the potential hassles involved in getting load and save to
work from inside a browser sandbox, I'm not sure it's a good idea. I think it's
probably important to do sandboxed wasm as a starting point. But, I'm less
certain about if, and on which platforms, I should implement graphics and sound
with native APIs. Probably I should support native APIs on linux, possibly I
should do macOS, but windows is out of the question. Wasm has the advantage of
supporting windows basically for free, if I can get it working on mac or linux.

The other big advantage of the WASM is supporting extremely convenient online
demos for people who want to try the system. Also, because of the browser
sandboxing, people don't need to worry much about possible malware when running
roms from strangers. I suppose many people are happy to download and run native
code, but ethically I'm not comfortable with encouraging people to engage in
such high risk behavior. I'm also not willing to jump through all the hoops
(membership fees, code signing, etc) to participate in the official developer
programs for macOS and windows. Wasm is probably my best shot at being
inclusive towards the people who use those platforms.


## Notes on building a luggable-style console with CSS

Improved the html & css somewhat on the wasm demo page. Now the screen looks
more like a crt in a console. There's a bezel around the canvas element and a
data slot area off to the right side with some boxes that can serve as
drag-and-drop targets. Still need to figure out how that part will work in
javascript. Also, need to draw some background images that actually look like
disc and memory card slots with eject buttons. Maybe also a reset button?

Links
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/border
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/border-radius

Trying to apply the bezel border directly to the canvas element had the effect
of scaling the canvas contents down to accommodate part of the border line
being drawn inside of the canvas element's width and height. Not good. So, I
added a bezel div around the canvas and applied the border to the bezel div.
That seems to work fine.
