<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-06-04: Plan to prototype a new VM emulator'
---

## Porting a bunch of assembly is hard

My first attempt at a markabForth shell, in [markab-lab/repl], is written
mostly in amd64 assembly language, with a few features in Forth. That now works
pretty well. But, the internal structure is such that porting to any other
architecture would be a hassle. I want to port to other architectures, so now I
have a problem.

[markab-lab/repl]: https://github.com/samblenny/markab-lab/tree/main/repl

I have been attempting to to factor apart and simplify my giant pile of
assembly code. Ideally, I would like the MarkabForth System to be structured
into three layers:

1. Markab VM: An emulator for a virtual machine comprising a stack machine CPU
   and memory mapped peripherals. The virtual CPU has opcodes called tokens, a
   data stack, a return stack, some registers, and an external bus interface.
   In addition to the CPU, the virtual machine has peripherals which talk to
   the CPU over a peripheral bus. The peripherals include RAM, keyboard input,
   and text terminal output. Later, I intend to add graphics, sound, real time
   clock, timers, and perhaps MIDI.

2. Markab Kernel: A binary ROM image of compiled token code for the MarkabVM
   emulator. This contains a pre-built dictionary and machine code (token code)
   implementations for core words. The kernel contains the necessary elements
   to load and compile the MarkabForth source code text.

3. MarkabForth: All the other parts of the MarkabForth System beyond the VM and
   kernel, including: compiler, outer interpreter, string and number
   formatting, debugging tools, error message formatting, and so on. The source
   code for MarkabForth will be written in the markabForth dialect of Forth.

Working towards that goal, I've hit the point in refactoring my assembly code
where I would have to rip apart and re-arrange a bunch of stuff in order to
make further progress. I would need to separate the virtual CPU emulator from
the kernel, compiler, inner interpreter, and outer interpreter. Currently,
those layers are not well isolated. And, since it's mostly written in assembly
(some of it is Forth-like macros), making the necessary changes would be slow
and tedious. I'm not sure yet what I want the new arrangement to look like.

Rather than tear up my old thing, which I just got to the point of working
rather nicely, I would rather leave it as-is, to use as a reference. For
exploring how to build a better separated system with VM emulator, kernel, and
code library, I plan to start a new sub-project.


## Plan for a prototype VM in Python

My tentative plan is:

1. Prototype a VM emulator in Python

2. Write a bootstrap compiler, also in Python, to compile markabForth source
   into a kernel ROM image.

3. Write a kernel in markabForth, based on my existing amd64 assembly code, and
   compile it into a ROM image with the bootstrap compiler.

4. Write the MarkabForth Library in markabForth, then load and compile it with
   the kernel which will run on top of the VM.

5. Once all that is working, re-implement the VM emulator in something faster
   than Python -- maybe in assembly, or perhaps in C.
