<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-05-25: MarkabForth manifesto + glossary'
---

## Trouble with naming things

Currently, I'm refactoring my compiler and dictionary so I can port some of the
code from assembler to Forth. In the course of doing that, I'm struggling a bit
with how to name things, explain how they work, and explain why I chose those
options. The rule of thumb that I'm following is, if I can't explain my choices
in coherent prose, then the design is probably bad.

The trouble with names of things related to Forth is, there are over 50 years
of evolving precedent with more and less agreement in usage depending on the
subject area. In some important cases, terms that were generally agreed upon 30
years ago in the Forth enthusiast community conflict with modern usage in ways
that can be seriously confusing to a modern reader (e.g. "threading", "stack",
true is 0, false is -1, NOT vs INVERT, 0=, and NEGATE, etc.).

In the family tree of Forth and Forth-like lineages, which was at one time
quite broad and diverse, there appears to have been a big schismatic struggle
where the standards enthusiast community won the fight for mind share. Or, at
least what's left of their stuff is the easiest to find when you go searching
for information about Forth.

Most the other branches are hard to find information about -- making progress
requires navigating lots of broken links and spelunking through old pdf scans
of magazines, books, and manuals on archive.org. It seems like a lot of the
post-figForth work on high performance Forth systems got channeled into
proprietary hardware and software companies which appear to be mostly defunct.
There is some writing available about those efforts now, but it's challenging
to integrate all the conceptual bits and pieces from different sources.

Anyhow, I'm trying to integrate what I've read from all those sources into a
coherent lexicon for talking about what I'm building. There are three main
areas I'm currently looking at:

1. Register names and instruction sets for stack machine CPUs. I've been
   writing an implicit virtual machine spec by way of implementing an emulator
   for it in assembly language. Seems like I might as well get a bit more
   formal about my process and try to incorporate ideas from the lineage of
   Forth stack machine CPU design. In particular, I want to use register names
   like `T`, `R`, and `A` to fit with some of Chuck's techniques and coding
   patterns for modern non-standard Forth (e.g. copying with loops of `@b !+`).

2. Conventions for layout and naming in Forth system memory maps. This includes
   dictionaries, terminal input buffer, string processing buffers, and other
   variables. I want to come up with a way to clearly talk about what exactly
   the "Dictionary" is, and what's involved with switching "Vocabularies" while
   in the compiler or assembler modes. This will be important, for example, to
   document, what happens if you attempt to redefine one of the built-in words?

3. Words to include in the built-in interpreter and compiler vocabularies. Some
   of the basics for stack operations and math stuff are straightforward. But,
   when it comes to control flow constructs, a lot of the traditional Forth
   constructs are very weird and confusing when viewed from the perspective of
   a modern programmer with some exposure to languages using C-like syntax. My
   concern is that I want to be able to write documentation for markabForth
   without having to constantly make excuses and explanations for why it uses
   familiar terms to represent unfamiliar meanings, as compared to common
   modern usage. I also don't want to confuse people who are familiar with
   Forth. Perhaps, the best compromise may be to add new words of my own, then
   write comprehensive tutorials.

So, with that in mind, I'll have a go at writing down my current understanding of
what I'm attempting to do, along with a glossary of the terms that I'm using in
my code and comments.


## MarkabForth manifesto

Talking about Forth is tricky because the essence of Forth is a process, and a
way of thinking about building tools, rather than a specific well-defined,
clearly demarcated, crystallized thing. As Chuck Moore tells it, Forth is about
building highly customized solutions, adapted to the needs of specific
problems, on specific hardware. Chuck emphasizes the importance of optimizing
the combined hardware and software system for overall simplicity. Realizing the
potential of Forth as practice and mindset depends on willingness to define
problems, and factor solutions, to avoid spending time and effort building
things you don't need. Omitting the non-essential is how we achieve simplicity.

To that end, ignoring crufty standards documents is highly effective at saving
a great deal of effort.

But, markabForth is not entirely unconcerned with Forth standards. To the
extent standards contain good ideas, I'm happy to consider them. To the extent
books on various Forths agree on useful conventions, I will try not to deviate
from those without good reason. The important thing is to arrive at a set of
words and vocabularies that are adequate for getting work done and which can be
explained without too much confusion to a modern reader.

With that in mind, some Forth conventions only make sense if you happen to need
backward compatibility with system architectures for hobby computers from the
late 1970's. That was a long time ago. Some people still run those machines.
But, I'm comfortable claiming that 40 years of progress in computing technology
is a sufficiently good reason for markabForth to abandon some of Forth's old
ways (ASCII strings, 16-bit cells with double-word operations, ...).

Of the beneficial old Forth patterns, the thing I most hope to incorporate is
the subtle craft of building a well-factored compiler and assembler, with the
capacity for user-defined compiling words, and with a high performance kernel
and block-based disk IO. As I understand it, doing that properly allows Forth
to be used in a manner that feels similar to working in a fancy Lisp, but with
very light resource requirements. I've read claims, from people who ought to
know, about using Forth for fancy database, graphics, and audio stuff. But,
I've never seen it in action.

I want markabForth to be usable for such things, with an emphasis on supporting
individual creative projects on constrained hardware with potentially limited
network connectivity. Most modern development tools are a big hassle to use in
that way. I want markabForth to be simple, fast, flexible, friendly for
not-super-technical folk, fun to use, and easy to extend and maintain. In
particular, I want markabForth to be suitable for archival-grade projects. The
point of using an emulated token-threaded VM is to allow for code to be
relatively safe to share and insulated from hardware and software updates over
time. Computing platforms come and go, so perhaps the VM will need to be ported
to new systems once in a while. But, other than that, my goal is for code, once
working, to continue working long into the future.


## Glossary

In 50-plus years of writing about Forth, people have used a variety of
evolving, and sometimes conflicting, terminology. This glossary attempts to
define key concepts used in the code and comments of markabForth.

Please don't be put off if this covers stuff you already know, or if it
includes things that seem too technical. While markabForth is a bit arcane and
technical in its manner of implementation, my goal is to have the end result
present a user interface that is simple, friendly, well-documented, and
accessible to people who do not have a deep technical background. To that end,
I need documentation that covers a lot of ground and tries not to make too many
assumptions about your existing background knowledge. This glossary is for
people who want to know about the internal system architecture of markabForth
-- including me, as I'm currently trying to define what that is.

- **Central Processing Unit** (**CPU**): The integrated circuit ("chip") at the
  center of a computer that directs and coordinates the process of computing.
  The CPU has logic circuits for tasks such as integer arithmetic and accessing
  data through peripheral devices attached to a memory bus. The CPU decides
  what to do by reading lists of instructions from a peripheral memory device.

- **Virtual CPU**: A Virtual CPU is like a physical CPU, but the Virtual CPU's
  operations are emulated in software, rather than etched in silicon. CPU
  emulation is commonly used for archival preservation of software written for
  computer systems that are no longer manufactured. MarkabForth's virtual CPU
  is implemented as amd64 assembly language subroutines for each of the
  instruction tokens in its virtual CPU instruction set.

- **CPU Instruction Set**: The set of instructions supported by a CPU. Usually,
  an instruction will take data from a CPU register, combine it with data from
  memory or a second register, then store the result to a register or a memory
  location. MarkabForth's virtual CPU's instructions are referred to as
  "Tokens", because Markab uses a token-threaded inner interpreter and it's
  easier to say tokens than to say "Virtual CPU Instructions".

- **Token-Threading**: In modern programming, "threading" typically refers to a
  method of scheduling concurrently running tasks. But, in Forth usage,
  "threading" means an entirely different thing. Forth tradition uses "threaded
  code", or "threaded interpreter", to denote a way of factoring code into
  subroutines. A threaded interpreter reads a list of subroutines and calls
  each one in turn. The types of threaded interpreters differ by how they store
  the list of subroutines. In the case of token threading, subroutines lists
  are formed from "tokens", which are typically 8-bits long (1 byte). Other
  types of threading can use lists of memory addresses, machine code
  instructions, or machine code to jump or call other machine code subroutines.

  MarkabForth uses token-threading -- although it is less efficient than other
  methods -- because it works well for a implementing a Virtual CPU with safety
  checks to prevent stack smashing, out of range memory access, and other types
  of unsafe actions that would be difficult to prevent with other threaded
  interpreters. I am willing to sacrifice some speed because doing so supports
  my goal to make it moderately safe to exchange markabForth code with
  strangers. Also, the safety checks make it easier to work on your own code
  conveniently and get helpful error messages instead of having to worry about
  crashing the markabForth interpreter if you make a little mistake.

- **Token**: See Token-Threading.

- **Memory**: An electronic circuit for storing data that can be operated on by
  a CPU. Due thermodynamics, the speed of light, and other
  unavoidable-laws-of-physics stuff, memory devices are built with tradeoffs
  between capacity and speed. If you want a very fast memory, it must have a
  relatively small capacity, be physically located close to the CPU, and have
  dedicated wiring. If you want a large memory, it must be slower, located
  farther away from the CPU, and wired for access mediated through a memory
  bus.

- **Memory Bus**: An electronic circuit for wiring chips together to exchange
  data, using addresses to select which data is currently being moved. CPUs
  use memory buses to connect to external devices, such as RAM chips and
  peripheral interfaces (network, USB, audio, video, ...). MarkabForth uses
  virtual memory addresses as arguments to its `!` and `@` words (store and
  fetch) and with the Virtual CPU's `Call` and `Jump` tokens.

- **Register**: Registers are type of small and very fast memory built into a
  CPU or peripheral device. Registers are used to keep track of commonly
  needed, and often frequently changing, data. MarkabForth's virtual CPU
  registers include `T` (top of data stack) and `R` (top of return stack),
  among others.

- **Random Access Memory** (**RAM**): RAM is used to hold data beyond what will
  fit in a CPU's registers or stacks. Accessing data stored in RAM is faster
  than accessing data stored on a disk but slower than data stored in
  registers. MarkabForth uses a virtual RAM chip for storing its dictionaries,
  terminal input buffer, variables, and compiled code (token code).

- **Stack Machine**: Stack machines are a type of computer built around a CPU
  designed for passing data between subroutines using stacks. Forth is a very
  good fit for stack machines because the instruction set and architecture of a
  stack machine closely matches the core words needed to build a Forth system.

- **Stack**: Stacks are a data structure used to access data in a "last in,
  first out" order. If you want to get data from a stack, you have to take the
  last item that was added to the stack. If you want to add data to a stack,
  you have to put that data on the top of the stack. This is different from
  Random Access Memory (RAM) where you can access any item you want, whenever
  you want, simply by telling the RAM chip which data you want by setting the
  address on your memory bus.

  In modern usage, "stack" usually refers to a large stack stored in RAM in
  the manner popularized by C compilers for modern operating systems. But,
  this is not what "stack" means in the context of Stack Machines for Forth.
  The stack size for a program compiled in C for a modern OS is likely to be
  on the order of 1MB to 8MB (1MB = 1,048,576 bytes). That's big enough that
  the active stack memory will likely not fit in L1 cache of a recent-ish
  CPU.

  In the context of Stack Machines, such as the markabForth Virtual Machine,
  stacks are small, fast, and built into the CPU. Stack machine stacks, at
  least on real Forth chips, are fast like registers. Typically a Forth CPU
  will have, at minimum, a data stack (aka parameter stack) and a return stack.
  In recent stack CPUs of Chuck Moore's design, the size is typically on the
  order of 16 items.

  In a virtual stack machine CPU with 16 data stack items and 16 return stack
  items stored in RAM, with each item taking 32 bits (4 bytes), the total RAM
  used for stack items would be 128 bytes. That's small enough to easily fit
  into the L1 cache memory of a vaguely modern CPU, so it should be relatively
  fast compared to a large C-style stack.

- **L1 Cache**: Modern CPUs use several tiers of memory to try to avoid the
  common situation where the CPU is ready to do work but it has to wait for
  data to become available in response to a request that it sent on the memory
  bus. Cache memory is built into the CPU, in a way that is slower to access
  compared to registers but faster compared to RAM. CPUs use cache memory to
  remember data that was recently accessed in RAM, in case they need to use it
  again. In the case of markabForth's stacks, RAM for the stack items gets
  accessed frequently.

  Of the different types of cache memory, L1 cache typically refers to the
  fastest kind but with the smallest capacity. Algorithms that work with data
  mostly from L1 cache can run faster than algorithms that have to spend a lot
  of time accessing data in RAM or the other slower types of cache. Mostly this
  is a matter of using compact data structures and accessing data in RAM
  sequentially, rather than skipping all over the place following pointers.
  MarkabForth separates its memory areas for the dictionary linked lists and
  compiled token code, among other reasons, to help with cache locality.

- **Virtual Machine** (**VM**): A Virtual Machine is virtual computer, with a
  virtual CPU, memory bus, and peripherals, where the behavior of the virtual
  hardware is emulated in software.

- **Word**: In Forth usage, a word is a sequence of characters representing a
  number, the name of variable, or the name of a subroutine. Words are
  separated by whitespace. In this example of a line of input that could be
  typed at the markabForth shell prompt,

  ```
  : do-math 1 2 + . ;
  ```
  there are 7 words: `:`, `do-math`, `1`, `2`, `+`, `.`, and `;`.

- **Vocabulary**: A linked list that contains names of words, along with other
  metadata that allows the Forth inner interpreter to make use of those words.
  Part of the concept of a Forth vocabulary is that you can switch which
  vocabulary is active depending on your current task. For example, some words
  only make sense in when compile mode is active, so they are included in the
  vocabulary for compiling, but not the vocabulary for interpreting.

- **Dictionary**: The set of all vocabularies available in a Forth system, not
  all of which will be active at the same time.

- **Compile**: To compile is to translate from Forth source code text to token
  code representing actions that can be performed by the inner interpreter. For
  example, suppose this string of input text is provided to the markabForth
  outer interpreter:

  ```
  : some-word 1 2 do-stuff ;
  ```

  The action for the `:` word is to enter compile mode and make a new
  dictionary entry to begin defining a word named `some-word`. In compile mode,
  `1` causes the compiler to add a byte representing the `U8` token, followed
  by a byte with the value `1` (argument to `U8` token), at the address in RAM
  for the compiled code. The `2` word compiles similarly. The `do-stuff` word
  will attempt to look `do-stuff` up in the dictionary, and if it is found, the
  compiler will insert the byte code for a `Call` token, followed by two bytes
  for the Virtual RAM address of the token code for `do-stuff` (argument to
  `Call` token). Finally, the `;` word, which ends a definition, will do a
  tail-call optimization to convert the `Call` token to a `Jump` token,
  finalize the dictionary entry, and exit compile mode.

- **Inner Interpreter**: The inner interpreter implements the token-threading
  algorithm to translate lists of compiled token code (lists of tokens in the
  VM's virtual RAM) into calls to token subroutines written in native assembly
  language for the host computer's actual CPU. The inner interpreter is a layer
  of abstraction right on top of the Virtual CPU.

- **Outer Interpreter**: The outer interpreter implements the algorithms to
  detect keystrokes (or UTF-8 from IME input), assemble those characters into a
  string of text, allow editing with Backspace, and then parse a line of input
  into words after you press the Enter key. The outer interpreter uses the
  dictionary and number parsing subroutine to translate words of input into a
  sequence of actions to be performed by the inner interpreter.

- **Parse**: In the context of a Forth outer interpreter, parse means splitting
  a string of input text into words by looking for whitespace boundaries, then
  looking each word up in the dictionary to determine its meaning. For words
  not listed in the dictionary, parsing also includes an attempt to translate
  the word to an integer. For example, a string of digit characters, like
  `"1234"`, can be translated to the binary value for the integer `1234`.

  Parsing does not include performing the action denoted by a word that is the
  name of a subroutine or a variable -- that is the job of the inner
  interpreter.
