<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-06-02: Variables, conditionals, and loops'
---

## Progress implementing new words

I added several new words for variables, conditionals, and loops. For some of
the words, my spellings for markabForth deviate from standard Forth because the
traditional spellings are annoying. In particular, `THEN` from standard Forth
has a semantic conflict with common usage in modern languages -- I see no good
reason to perpetuate that confusion in markabForth.

I chose the spellings below because they will simplify writing documentation
and tutorials for markabForth. Rather than having to write sidebars where I
explain the surprising weirdness of words from standard Forth, I can just use
words that are better aligned with common modern usage in languages people may
likely already be familiar with.


### Variables and constants (VAR, CONST)

- `VAR`: Declare a variable. For example,

   ```
   VAR x  3 x !  x ? 3  OK
   ```

   In standard Forth, this would be called `VARIABLE`, but the `var`
   abbreviation is common in modern usage and shorter to type.

- `CONST`: Declare a constant. For example,

  ```
  4 CONST y  y . 4  OK
  ```

  In standard Forth, this would be called `CONSTANT`, but the `const`
  abbreviation is common in modern usage and shorter to type.


### Conditionals (IF..ELSE..ENDIF)

- `IF`: Begin a conditional grouping where the words between `IF` and `ELSE`,
   or `IF` and `ENDIF` (when `ELSE` clause is omitted), will run only if the
   top of stack is 0. When value on top of stack is non-zero, the words between
   `ELSE` and `ENDIF` will run, assuming an `ELSE` clause is present. In any
   case, normal control flow resumes after the `ENDIF`. For example,

   ```
   : zero? IF ."  yes" ELSE ."  no" ENDIF ." _" ;  OK
   -1 zero? no_  OK
    0 zero? yes_  OK
    1 zero? no_  OK
   : 5red? 5 = IF ."  Red!" ENDIF ;  OK
   0 5red?  OK
   4 5red?  OK
   5 5red? Red!  OK
   ```

- `ELSE`: Continue a conditional grouping introduced by `IF`. Words between
  `IF` and `ELSE` run when the condition is true (top of stack is 0). Words
  between `ELSE` and `ENDIF` run when the condition is false (top of stack is
  non-zero).

- `ENDIF`: Finish a conditional grouping of words, introduced by `IF`, and
  possibly including an `ELSE.

  In standard Forth, `THEN` is used to end an `IF` grouping. That historical
  accident has a legitimate reason (see `/HOPL.html` in an archive of the old
  ColorForth website). But, I don't care to perpetuate its confusing weirdness.
  Using `ENDIF` works just as well without contradicting the usage of `then`
  that is common in modern languages from the lineage of ALGOL, C, Simula, and
  Pascal. In that tradition, conditionals take the form of

  ```
  if <condition-expression> then <true-block> else <false-block>
  ```

  where `then` may be optional or implicit (e.g. `)` in C, `:` in Python), and
  the block boundaries are indicated with `{..}`, `begin..end;`, indentation,
  or the like.


### Loops (FOR..NEXT)

Looping is a bit different. I've adopted the `FOR..NEXT` counted loop construct
from ColorForth because it's quite nice and fits well with my ideas about good
ways of looping to avoid bugs and timing glitches.

- `FOR`: Begin a grouping of words that repeat in a counted loop. `FOR` moves
  the top item of the data stack to the top of the return stack, where it is
  kept as a loop counter. Within the loop, the word `I` can be used to push a
  copy of the loop counter to the top of the data stack. The loop counter
  starts at the number that `FOR` took from the top of the stack, then
  continues down to 0. The counting acts like `for(int i=n; i>=0; i--){...}` in
  C. For example,

  ```
  : nTo0 ."   n:" dup . ."  {" FOR i . NEXT ."  }" ;  OK
  1 nTo0  n: 1 { 1 0 }  OK
  2 nTo0  n: 2 { 2 1 0 }  OK
  3 nTo0  n: 3 { 3 2 1 0 }  OK
  ```

- `NEXT`: End a grouping of words that repeat in a counted loop. `NEXT` checks
  the loop counter (top of return stack) to see if it is zero. If so, the loop
  ends, which means `NEXT` removes the loop counter from the return stack and
  lets control flow move to the word following `NEXT`. If the loop counter is
  not zero, `NEXT` subtracts 1 from the loop counter and moves control flow
  back to the word following `FOR`.


## Rationale: Why only FOR..NEXT loops?

Looping can have a big impact on overall system performance, so it is important
to approach it with due care and respect. I want markabForth to be usable as a
tool for live performance. Audio should not glitch. Animation should not
jitter. The system should not randomly lock up in the middle of a performance.

Choice of looping constructs is one area where markabForth favors coding
practices from the programming tradition of safety-critical embedded systems. I
don't expect markabForth to be used in vehicles or medical devices. But,
properties which make cars and pacemakers safe are also good for glitch-free
real-time multi-media performance.

In both cases, it is important to have a low latency event loop, where you
don't have to worry about unpredictable timing. You want each event handler
task to finish quickly and return control flow to the main event loop. In that
way, the whole system stays responsive without glitches or jitter.

I'm a fan of Gerard J. Holzmann's
[The Power of 10: Rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Power_of_10:_Rules_for_Developing_Safety-Critical_Code)
for developing safety-critical code. In particular, rule 2, which says
approximately, "use for-loops, not while-loops", is useful for preventing an
entire category of bugs that can cause timing glitches or system lockups.

The idea is, if you limit yourself to using for-loops, where a counter imposes
a hard limit on the maximum number of iterations, you don't have to worry about
infinite loops causing control flow to get stuck. With for-loops, the worst
consequence of a logic error deciding when to exit the loop is that, for
example, maybe your loop runs for 6,000 iterations, when you meant it to do 20
iterations at most. The thing that doesn't happen -- which is the whole point
-- is that control flow does not get stuck forever in the buggy loop, causing
your whole system to freeze up until somebody resets it.
