<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-07-08: Getting close to self-hosting'
link: 'https://samblenny.github.io/markab-dev-journal/2022-07-08.html'
published: '2022-07-08T00:00Z'
updated: '2022-07-08T00:00Z'
author: 'Sam Blenny'
copyright: 'Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny'
---

## Progress on relative addressing

Since last update, I converted the Markab VM `BZ`, `BFOR`, `JAL`, and `CALL`
instructions to use program counter relative addressing. This means the code
for compiled words can be relocated to a different address in memory and still
work.


## Split dictionary with hashmaps

I converted my previous single linked-list dictionary into two vocabularies,
each with its own hashmap. As I had been hoping, the hashmaps make compiling in
the VM much faster. I've arranged it so that the kernel rom image includes the
hashmap for the core vocabulary. The core vocabulary hashmap allows `find` to
locate jump addresses for all the words in the kernel and compiler. The `boot`
word then creates a second hashmap at runtime for the extensible vocabulary.
The extensible vocabulary's hashmap holds jump addresses to words that are
defined after the kernel is running in the VM.

Over the past week, I spent a lot of time working on a C program to brute-force
search through combinations of parameters and bin counts to use for string hash
functions. It wasn't obvious at first how to rank the results, but I settled on
sorting results in ascending order first by the maximum number of hash
collisions, then by the count of bins with a collision frequency above the
median collision frequency.

In the core and extensible vocabulary hashmaps, each of 64 bins holds a pointer
to the head item of that bin's linked list. Currently, the kernel has 166
words. The core vocabulary's maximum list length for a bin is 4, and the median
is 3.

For now, the linked lists for hashmap bins use absolute addresses. So, if I
were to copy the memory region for the extensible vocabulary into a rom file,
it would not work when loaded into low memory. The code for compiled words
would be fine, but the hashmap's linked-list addresses would be wrong.
Converting the hashmap list links to relative addressing is one of the last
remaining tasks to complete a self-hosted build of the kernel and compiler.


## Compiling the kernel with cat

For the moment, instead of adding file IO to the Markab VM, I've been using
the `cat` shell command to pipe markab source code into a VM instance running
the kernel. It seems to work fine. My make target for `make selfhost` does:

```
cat mkb_autogen.mkb kernel.mkb | ./markab_vm.py
```

Since I fixed a bug with comment handling, `make selfhost` seems to work. But,
working only means that all the words are getting compiled into the extensible
vocabulary. I still need to make the hashmap link addresses relocatable, and I
still need to devise a way of exporting the extensible vocabulary's memory
region to a file.

I could build file IO into the kernel, but I'm tempted to just use a hexdump
for the export. For that to work, I would need an additional tool to convert
the hexdump to a binary rom image file. Something like using the `xxd` command
line utility, invoked as `xxd -r -p kernel.hex kernel.rom` might work well.

Using the approach of exporting rom images as hexdumps printed to standard
output would have interesting tradeoffs. One advantage is, it would be
convenient to compile rom images using unix style text processing without
getting bogged down in platform-specific file IO details.

Exporting roms as hexdumps would bypass the need for a sandboxing mechanism to
make file IO safer, and sandboxing file IO is a non-trivial task. The safest
file IO is no file IO, right? Of course, the major disadvantage of no file IO
is that you have no file IO, which is a non-trivial disadvantage. Perhaps using
hexdumps with xxd could be a good starting point to let me focus on getting the
self-hosting compile working without bogging down in file IO.


## Next steps

My todo list to finish self-hosted compiling:

1. Convert the hashmap linked-lists to using relative addressing

2. Get extensible vocab rom image export working with a hexdump

3. Make a script or makefile target for converting a rom image hexdump to
   a binary rom image file

4. Do a self-hosted compile, diff the self-hosted rom against the bootstrap
   compiler's rom, and resolve any differences
