<!--
Copyright (c) 2022 Sam Blenny
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-NC-SA-4.0
-->

---
title: '2022-04-05: Assembly, Stacks, System V ABI'
---

## Assembly is awesome

I've been having a lot of fun coding in ia64/amd64 assembly in NASM. My
comments and commit messages at https://github.com/samblenny/markab-lab have
many more details on specifically what I've been doing, so I won't repeat all
that here.


## Stacks and System V ABI

The System V ABI [AMD64 Supplement], which is part of the [Linux Standard Base]
specifications, explains some very important things, including:

1. How registers and stack frames are used for argument passing to C-style
   function calls

2. Which registers get preserved by the callee during such function calls

3. How the stack is prepared by `exec` before your process starts. This
   includes an explanation of the initial stack frame layout with `argc`,
   `argv`, and `envp` for command line arguments and environment variables.

[AMD64 Supplement]: https://refspecs.linuxbase.org/elf/x86_64-abi-0.99.pdf
[Linux Standard Base]: https://refspecs.linuxbase.org/

It looks like I should be able to use the stack from `exec` as my stack
machine's return stack. That should be compatible with also using the same
stack for syscalls, X11 library calls, and perhaps whatever other libraries I
might have to use for doing audio IO.


## Indirect addressing with LEA and MOV

One surprising gotcha gave me some trouble today. It turns out that if you do
an indirect address calculation for `MOV` or `LEA` where a register gets
multiplied by a scaling factor, the previous values of `RAX` and `RDX` will get
stomped on during that calculation. Probably this is documented somewhere, but
the ia64 and amd64 programmer's manuals are enormous. As far as I can tell, the
behavior for an indirect address calculation matches up with the documented
behavior for a qword `MUL`, which is supposed to put its result in `RDX:RAX`.

